the apparatus 10 represented schematically in fig1 comprises a conveyor in a form of a wire mesh belt 12 supported on spaced rollers , two of which are shown at 14 , 15 , and on longitudinally extending runners ( not shown ). one of the rollers is driven ( by means not shown ) so that a strip of carpet 16 may be carried longitudinally past a succession of dye application stations . in this instance , for purposes of clarity , only two stations 18 , 18a are illustrated but typically there might be of the order of six stations . each of the dye application stations , 18 , 18a includes an array of nozzles 20 extending transversely of and above the conveyor . these nozzles are supported in a nozzle board 22 and are supplied with dye liquor from a manifold 24 by way of respective solenoid flow valves 26 and flexible tubes 27 . a master control 28 ( fig3 ) includes valve control circuitry 28a programmable to open and close the control valves to thereby selectively control multiple streams issuing from the nozzles 20 in accord with the pattern desired to be produced on the travelling carpet . in a modification in accord with applicant &# 39 ; s copending application ser . no . 042 , 501 , rather than providing an individual valve for each nozzle 20 , each valve supplies a distributor connected to several nozzles in a respective group of nozzles , the arrangement being such that one or more repeats of the pattern occur across the carpet . in this case , the lengths of the fluid lines which connect the nozzles of each group to its distributor are substantially equal . it should also be appreciated that while direct valve control of the liquid stream is implied in fig1 control may be indirect , such as by way of valved control of a deflection fluid jet for each issuing liquid stream . each dye application station applies dye liquor of a particular chosen colour and the portions of dye deposited at the respective dye application stations are intended once supplied to be complementary so as to give rise to a chosen pattern on the strip of carpet . it will be appreciated that for a given longitudinal increment of the carpet , dye application to that increment by stations downstream of the first must be retarded in time with respect to application of dye to the increment by the first station , which time allows the increment to travel from one station to the next . for this reason , appropriate retard times are built in to the pattern program and the transmission of pattern data to control switches for the valves is clocked with respect to the travel of the conveyor belt 12 . however , for each particular print run , differing dye pressures , in turn determined by , inter alia , dye viscosities and the proportion of nozzles simultaneously applying dye may affect the accuracy of the retard times provided for , and pattern resolution may thereby be adversely affected . to assist in correcting for this fine longitudinal asynchronism on commencement of a print run , and then maintaining synchronism as the run proceeds , the apparatus of fig1 is modified as shown in fig2 and 3 . a dedicated test nozzle 29 , 29a for each station is mounted on a bracket 31 , 31a laterally of the respective nozzle boards and the master control is provided with a mode 35 by which the test nozzles of the successive dye application stations may be caused to emit test streams of dye liquor , comprising a regular succession of droplets . the test nozzles 29 , 29a are typically arranged outside the lateral margins of the carpet but this is not strictly necessary . disposed below each test nozzle is a two - part detector 30 , 30a which is photosensitive to the passage of the front of a test stream , which may be a single droplet from the nozzle . preferably , these detectors are uniformly displaced , preferably between 6 and 100 mm , below the nozzles , and are positioned at approximately the level of the carpet , with the test nozzles at the same height as the print nozzles 20 . once master control 28 is operative in the test mode , dye is emitted from the two test nozzles as a sequence of droplets and the fronts of the successive droplets are detected by detectors 30 , 30a . output signals generated by the detectors , which signals indicate the times of emission of the respective test streams or droplets are fed back to the control , specifically to comparators 34 forming part of the control . one of two comparisons may be made : either the time between the detection of the test streams at detectors 30 , 30a is compared with a nominal time or the time elapsed before each detection is individually compared with a respective nominal time , such nominal times being supplied by the program by way of valve control circuitry 28a and assuming no dye pressure variations . the time unit is of course dependent on conveyor movement , as sensed by a transducer 37 associated with the conveyor . output correction signals generated by comparators 34 , such signals being indicative of the extent of longitudinal asynchronism , pass to adjustment circuitry 33 for modifying the selective control of the multiple dye streams issued at nozzles 20 whereby to reduce the asynchronism . this is essentially achieved by adjusting programmed retard times applied to the valve control circuitry . the process is carried out until longitudinal synchronism is obtained at the commencement of a print run and is then automatically continued during the run to ensure minimization of asynchronism . such may arise , for example , in a longer print run as temperature changes affect dye viscosities to varying extents . in practice , a test stream in the form of a discrete droplet is emitted at the rate of between 3 and 6 per repeat of the pattern , perhaps every 15cms of carpet travel . an important advantage of the invention is the elimination of visually based manual synchronization . even for a skilled operator , this is a time consuming operation . where it is desired to changeover pattern without stopping carpet movement , the invention minimises the time taken and therefore the wastage of carpet . fig4 shows a further modification of the apparatus of fig1 by which one end of each nozzle board 22 is coupled to the conveyor belt 12 so as to largely alleviate lateral asynchronism between the respective components . the drawing shows ony one end of one nozzle board but is representative of similar arrangements found at one end of each of the nozzle boards of the other dye application stations . as shown , nozzle board 22 carries at its end a ball bushing 40 for slidably mounting the board to an upright shaft 42 . bushing 40 is necessary because the nozzle board is nominally vertically adjustable between its print and neutral modes , as detailed in applicants co - pending patent application ser . no . 042 , 501 . shaft 42 is screw threadingly engaged at its lower end with a follower block 44 which in turn carries on its inside face a wear strip 46 of a material such a polyethylene . block 44 extends about 30cm along the margin of the conveyor . wear strip 46 is slotted at 48 to slidably receive a protruding marginal formation 50 on the conveyor belt . block 46 is biased against the margin of the belt by a second , adjustably spring loaded centering device 51 . device 51 includes a shaft 52 which is also screw threadingly engaged with the follower block and is slidable by way of a ball bushing 54 within a sleeved housing 56 fastened in aperture 58 in a side plate 60 of the machine frame . a head 62 on the outer end of shaft 52 within housing 56 engages a helical compression spring 64 , the tension of which is adjustable by rotation of a screw 66 threadingly displaceable through the outer end wall of housing 56 . it will be noted that the two shafts 42 , 52 carry nuts 68 for adjustably setting their positions relative to the follower block . it will be appreciated that the coupling arrangement just described , will serve to provide edge guiding for centering the conveyor belt to accurately transmit to the nozzle board any lateral conveyor belt movement which does occur . specifically , it will be seen that lateral displacement of the conveyor belt induces , through follower block 46 and upright coupling shaft 42 a corresponding lateral displacement of the nozzle board 22 . to permit this displacement , the nozzle board is preferably coupled to its vertical displacement system by way of one or more , typically two , sliding bearings ( not shown )."}
{"publication_number": "US-3942341-A", "abstract": "an improved additive dispensing system for sequentially dispensing a plurality of treating agents into the wash tub of an automatic fabric washing machine at predetermined times during the washing cycle . a plurality of compartments are provided for retaining the various laundry additives to be dispensed into the wash tub . a channel is in liquid flow communication between one compartment and a liquid supply means arranged for directing liquid into the channel . an aperture is provided in the bottom of the channel for effectively removing contaminating lint from the liquid prior to introduction of the liquid into the compartment .", "application_number": "US-50187774-A", "description": "referring to fig1 the dispenser 10 for an automatic clothes washer is shown with the cover ( not shown ) removed therefrom to expose the details of construction of the present embodiment . the dispenser 10 , as shown , is generally an annularly - shaped segmented channel or trough defined by annular inner and outer walls 12 and 14 respectively . the dispenser 10 is divided into four annular compartments 16 , 18 , 20 , and 22 . the presoak agent is placed in compartment 18 through opening 28 , detergent is placed in compartment 16 through opening 26 , bleach is placed into compartment 20 through opening 30 , and rinse agent is placed in compartment 22 through opening 32 . unlike compartments 16 , 20 and 22 , compartment 18 is not designed to store a treating agent but merely provides a passageway for introducing prewash liquid treating agents directly into the washing machine tub or into a filter pan located between the tub and dispenser 10 to be effective during the first fill cycle of the machine . to this end the bottom wall portion of the compartment 18 has a large opening 33 to facilitate easy dispensing of the prewash agent . liquid being pumped from the wash tub is introducted into the dispenser 10 by a liquid flow diverter mechanism ( not shown ). the liquid for compartment 16 flows through channel 35 from inlet 35 to the compartment . liquid for compartment 22 flows through channel 39 from inlet 41 to the compartment . liquid for compartment 20 flows through channel 40 from inlet 42 to the compartment . the liquid flow diverter mechanism is sequentially controlled to selectively direct recirculation liquid into preselected inlets 37 , 41 and 42 for mixing liquid with the treating agents being held in the compartments to flush the agents into the wash tub at predetermined times in a cycle of the automatic washing machine . detergent or soap to be dispensed from compartment 16 during the wash cycle is usually in solid , granular or high viscosity water soluble form . the bottom of the compartment 16 is provided with a discharge outlet at one end thereof ( not shown ) for flushing the detergent or soap to be dispensed into the wash load . bleach stored in compartment 20 is dispensed during the wash cycle subsequent to the dispensing of the detergent in a manner that will hereinafter be described in detail . compartment 20 is defined by a bottom wall 34 and side walls , one side wall 36 being shown in fig2 . extending into compartment 20 is an outlet end 38 of a passageway or channel 40 . channel 40 is located adjacent the cover and connects the compartment 20 with the liquid inlet area 42 . at the proper time in the washing operation usually after the detergent is flushed , the machine timer controls introduction of recirculation water into liquid inlet area 42 for flow through channel 40 and into the bleach compartment 20 . provision is made to drain the compartment 20 when there has been a sufficient amount of recirculation water introduced into the compartment to dilute the concentrated bleach prior to introduction of a diluted bleach solution into the wash load . one embodiment is shown in connection with the present invention and consists of a siphon tube 44 . the siphon operates in a normal fashion wherein it has a short leg positioned within the chamber 20 and spaced above the bottom wall 34 thereof . the other leg of the siphon extends through the bottom of the wall 34 and in communication with the interior of the wash tub for dispensing the diluted bleach solution into the wash . when the diluted bleach solution reaches the top of the siphon the siphoning action starts with the diluted bleach solution being drained slowly through the siphon and into the wash load . it will be understood that this action of draining through the siphon will continue until the water entering the compartment 20 through outlet 38 terminates and then the mixture of bleach and water in the compartment will continue to flow out through the siphon until the compartment 20 is emptied . one of the difficulties with this bleach dilution and flushing arrangement is that the hole or tube diameter through which the dilute bleach solution is dispensed is necessarily quite small due to the desire to add the bleach solution to the wash slowly . it has been found that by using recirculation water that contains lint and other large contaminants there is a possibility that the hole or tube will become clogged and detrimentally affect the flushing or evacuating operation . referring to fig1 - 3 there is shown means for separating lint and other large contaminants from the recirculation water prior to introduction of the recirculation water into compartment 20 . there is provided an aperture 46 upstream of the compartment 20 and located in the bottom wall 48 of channel 40 . the aperture 46 is in communication with the interior of the washer through an opening 58 in the bottom of the dispenser and into an underlying filter pan if there is one . the aperture 46 extends across a major portion of the channel bottom wall 48 and is spaced from upstanding channel side walls 50 and 52 with the portion of the aperture adjacent each of the respective side walls being divergent in a direction away from the side wall . the spacing of the aperture from the channel side walls can be varied depending upon the desired liquid flow rate for entering into the compartment . the greater the space the higher the flow rate into the compartment 20 . the aperture may be of various dimensions with the portion of the aperture adjacent each of the channel side walls being divergent in a direction away from the side wall . in the drawings such an aperture has triangular end portions , however , they may also be curved inwardly . in the preferred embodiment the aperture 46 is located in a ramp portion 53 consisting of ascending and descending ramps 54 and 56 , respectively , which ramp portion forms a part of the channel bottom wall 48 . it will be noted that the aperture is located between the ascending and descending ramps . this ramp arrangement tends to increase the liquid flow velocity in the ramp portion 53 and enhances the lint removal from the liquid passing along the channel 40 . by this arrangement the recirculation water traveling through the channel 40 carrying with it lint and other contaminant particles encounters the aperture 46 which disrupts the liquid flow pattern such that some of the liquid with a large portion of the lint and other contaminants carried by the recirculation water passes down through aperture 46 while at the same time the other portion of the liquid which is relatively lint free passes between the divergent end portions of the aperture and the channel side walls and then into the bleach compartment 20 via channel outlet end 38 . by this relatively simple arrangement the lint may be easily and effectively removed from the recirculation water and is deposited either into the wash tub or underlying filter pan , if there is one , and does not necessitate periodic cleaning which would normally be the case should the lint be removed by a screen . the foregoing is a description of the preferred embodiment of the invention and variations may be made thereto without departing from the true spirit of the invention , as defined in the appended claims.