The touchscreen is used to control many features that , in traditional cars , are controlled using physical buttons ( for example , adjusting mirrors ) .
You can also use the touchscreen to customize Model 3 to suit your preferences .
Warning : Always pay attention to road and traffic conditions when driving .
To minimize driver distraction and ensure the safety of vehicle occupants as well as other road users , avoid using the touchscreen to adjust settings while the vehicle is in motion .
Note : The image below is provided for demonstration purposes only .
Depending on vehicle options , software version and market region , your touchscreen may appear slightly different .
If you see an exclamation mark , touch it to see warning messages that are in effect .
Note : An airbag status symbol displays in the top corner of the touchscreen only when Model 3 is powered on , ready to drive , and the airbag is turned off ( see Airbags on page 36 ) .
Monitor this area when driving as it displays important information such as driving speed and warning messages ( see Car Status on page 52 ) .
When the car is in Park , you can open the trunks or charge port door .
This area automatically updates to display information such as incoming calls , seat belt reminders , current state of the wipers , etc .
You can display distance driven , energy usage and energy efficiency starting at any time , or since Model 3 was last charged .
You can also display this information for up to two trips .
Touch in the top right corner of a trip to rename or reset a trip .
Display tire pressures or view cautions or warnings related to pressures that are not within acceptable limits ( see Tire Care and Maintenance on page 138 ) .
Touch the app launcher then choose from the following apps : Calendar .
Access the Internet using the web browser ( if available and equipped with premium connectivity ) .
This area also displays automatically whenever you shift into Reverse .
Note : Swiping up on the app launcher displays the most recently used app ( provided an app is not currently being displayed ) .
Note : Depending on the market region and vehicle options , your vehicle may not be equipped with some features .
The map displays on the touchscreen at all times ( see Maps and Navigation on page 108 ) .
Note : When you touch Controls , choose an app , or expand Media Player , the window displays on top of the map .
To close the Controls window , touch Controls again or touch the X in the top corner of the window .
To close an app , touch the X in the top corner of the window .
To close Media Player , drag it all the way down to the bottom of the touchscreen or touch the icon again .
One-touch access to call Tesla Customer Support and Roadside Assistance .
Supports automatic locking and unlocking as well as several other functions using the Tesla mobile app .
An authenticated phone is the preferred key because you never need to remove it from your pocket or purse .
The key card is used to `` authenticate '' your phone to work with Model 3 and to add or remove other key cards , phones , or key fobs .
In situations where your authenticated phone has a dead battery , or is lost or stolen , use your key card to unlock , drive , and lock Model 3 .
Although you can drive Model 3 away from its key , you will be unable to power it back on after it powers off .
Authenticated Phone Using your phone is the most convenient way to access your Model 3 .
As you approach , your phone 's Bluetooth signal is detected and doors unlock when you press a door handle .
Download the Tesla mobile app to your phone .
Log into the Tesla mobile app using your Tesla Account user name and password .
Note : You must remain logged in to your Tesla Account to use your phone to access Model 3 .
Ensure that your phone 's Bluetooth setting is turned on .
To authenticate your phone or use it as a key , the phone must be powered on and Bluetooth must be enabled .
Keep in mind that your phone must have enough battery power to run Bluetooth and that many phones disable Bluetooth when the battery is low .
In the Tesla mobile app , touch PHONE KEY then touch START to search for your Model 3 .
When your Model 3 is detected , the mobile app asks you to tap your key card .
Tap the key card against the Model 3 card reader on the door pillar or center console ( see Key Card on page 8 ) .
When Model 3 detects your key card , the mobile app confirms that your phone has been successfully authenticated .
If the key card is not successfully scanned within approximately 30 seconds , the mobile app displays an error message .
Touch PHONE KEY on the app again to retry .
Therefore , if more than one phone is detected and you want to use , or authenticate , a different phone , move the other connected phone ( s ) out of range or turn off its Bluetooth setting .
Note : Unlike the mobile app , once a phone has been authenticated , it no longer requires an internet connection to communicate with Model 3 .
Note : If multiple vehicles are linked to the Tesla Account , you must switch the mobile app to the Model 3 that you want to access before you can use the phone as a key .
Key Card Tesla provides you with two Model 3 key cards , designed to fit in your wallet .
Model 3 reads a key card only when placed within very close proximity ( an inch or two ) to one of its card readers .
Card readers are located on the driver 's side door pillar and on the center console .
To use a key card to unlock or lock Model 3 , position the card as illustrated and tap it against the card reader located below the Autopilot camera on the driver 's side door pillar .
When Model 3 detects the key card , the exterior lights flash , the mirrors unfold or fold ( if equipped with the premium package and Fold Mirrors is on ) , and the doors unlock or lock .
Note : You may need to physically touch the driver 's side door pillar with the key card , and you may need to hold it against the transmitter for one or two seconds .
Once inside , power up Model 3 by pressing the brake pedal within thirty seconds of scanning the key card ( see Starting and Powering Off on page 46 ) .
If you wait longer than thirty seconds , you must re-authenticate by placing the key card near the card reader located behind the cup holders on the center console .
Note : You must position the key card within an inch or two of a card reader to allow Model 3 to read it .
You may need to physically touch the center console or driver 's side door pillar with the key card , and you may need to hold it against the transmitter for one or two seconds .
Caution : Always carry your key card with you in your purse or wallet to use as a backup in case your authenticated phone has a dead battery , or is lost or stolen .
Key fob If you have purchased the key fob accessory ( available for purchase from Tesla stores or online at https : //shop.tesla.com ) , you can quickly familiarize yourself with this key by thinking of it as a miniature version of Model 3 , with the Tesla badge representing the front .
The key has three buttons that feel like softer areas on the surface .
Hold down for one to two seconds to open the charge port door .
Once inside , power up Model 3 by pressing the brake pedal within two minutes of pressing the unlock button on the key fob ( see Starting and Powering Off on page 46 ) .
If you wait longer than two minutes , you must press the unlock button again , or place the key fob near the card reader located behind the cup holders on the center console .
When your key fob is detected , the two minute authentication period restarts .
When approaching or leaving Model 3 carrying the key fob , you do not need to point the key fob at Model 3 as you press a button , but you must be within operating range .
Radio equipment on a similar frequency can affect the key .
If the key fob does not work ( for example , its battery is dead ) , you can touch it 's flat side against the card reader on the driver 's side door pillar ( like the key card ) .
Instructions for changing the battery are provided below .
Note : You can use the same key fob with multiple Model 3 vehicles provided you authenticate it ( see Managing Keys on page 10 ) .
With the key fob placed button side down on a soft surface , release the bottom cover .
Remove the battery by lifting it away from the retaining clips .
Holding the bottom cover at an angle , align the tabs on the cover with the corresponding slots on the key fob , then press the cover firmly onto the key fob until it snaps into place .
Test that the key fob works by unlocking and locking your vehicle .
Place the lanyard over the pin located between the slots on the widest side of the key fob .
An icon displays next to each key to indicate whether the key is a phone , key card , or key fob .
Use this list to manage keys that have access to your vehicle .
To add or delete keys , see Adding and Removing Keys on page 10 .
Note : You can use the same key for more than one Model 3 .
This prevents you from having to deal with multiple keys when you switch vehicles .
If you customize the name of an authenticated key card or key fob on one Model 3 ( by touching the pencil icon ) , any other Model 3 to which the key card or key fob is authenticated also displays the same customized name .
Adding and Removing Keys Adding a new key card or key fob : Note : If adding a key fob , ensure the key fob is at room temperature .
Pairing may be unsuccessful if the key fob is cold .
Scan your new key card or key fob on the key reader behind the cup holders on the top of the center console .
After the new key card or key fob is recognized , remove it from the key reader .
already has access to the vehicle ) key card or key fob on the key reader behind the cup holders on the top of the center console .
When complete , the key list on the touchscreen displays the newly- authenticated key .
You can customize its name by touching the associated pencil icon .
Adding a new phone key : Note : To add a new phone key , Bluetooth must be enabled and the phone must have the Tesla mobile app installed and connected to the vehicle ’ s Tesla account .
While sitting in the vehicle , open the Tesla mobile app and select the appropriate vehicle ( if there are multiple vehicles associated with the account ) , then touch Phone Key > Start .
Scan an already-authenticated key card or key fob on the key reader behind the cup holders on the top of the center console .
When the mobile app notifies you that the pairing was successful , touch Done .
The name of the phone key is determined by the name used in the phone ’ s settings .
Find the key that you would like to delete in the key list , then touch the key ’ s associated trash icon .
When prompted , scan an already- authenticated key card or key fob on the key reader behind the cup holders on the top of the center console to confirm the deletion .
When complete , the key list no longer includes the deleted key .
Note : Model 3 requires at least one authenticated key card or key fob at all times .
If only one key card is included on the key list , this key can not be deleted .
Mobile App In addition to using it to authenticate a phone as your Model 3 key , you can use the mobile app to communicate with Model 3 remotely using your iPhone® or AndroidTM phone .
Note : When Supercharging , additional notifications alert you when you will be charged idle fees for parking at a supercharger after charging is complete .
The idle fees are waived if your vehicle is moved within five minutes of when the vehicle finishes charging .
See Supercharger Usage Fees and Idle Fees on page 134 .
Note : It is possible that your charge port latch may freeze in place in extremely cold weather or icy conditions .
In cases where you can not remove or insert the charge cable , or the car is not Supercharging due to the latch being frozen in place , use your Tesla mobile app to precondition your vehicle on HI for approximately 30-45 minutes ( you must use your mobile app to precondition the vehicle ; setting your climate to HI using the touchscreen will not be effective ) .
This helps thaw ice on the charge port latch so the charge cable can be removed or inserted .
• Flash the exterior lights or honk the horn to find Model 3 when parked .
Note : Keyless Driving can be used to bypass PIN to Drive in cases where you forgot your PIN or your touchscreen is unresponsive .
• Support the Model 3 Calendar app by allowing the mobile app to send your phone 's calendar data to Model 3 .
Note : To allow the mobile app to communicate with Model 3 , the phone must be connected to the internet and mobile access must be enabled ( touch Controls > Safety & Security > Allow Mobile Access on the touchscreen ) .
Note : If multiple vehicles are linked to the Tesla Account , you must switch to the Model 3 that you want to access in the mobile app before the phone can be used as a key .
Note : To take advantage of new and improved features , download updated versions of the mobile app as they become available .
Caution : Tesla does not support the use of third party applications to contact Model 3 .
Note : The above list may not represent an exhaustive list of the functions available on the Tesla mobile app .
To ensure access to new and improved features , download updated versions of the mobile app as they become available .
Just carry your authenticated phone with you .
Model 3 recognizes the presence of an authenticated phone and automatically unlocks when you press a door handle , and locks when you leave ( see Walk- Away Door Lock on page 13 ) .
Note : If you do n't have your authenticated phone with you ( or if the phone 's battery is dead or its Bluetooth setting is turned off ) , place the key card against the driver 's side door pillar to manually unlock or lock Model 3 ( see Keys on page 7 ) .
Using Exterior Door Handles Use your thumb to push the wide part of the door handle .
The handle pivots toward you , and you can open the door by pulling the handle or pulling the edge of the door .
Opening Doors from the Interior Model 3 doors are electrically powered .
To open a door while sitting inside , press the button located at the top of the interior door handle .
When a door or trunk is open , the touchscreen displays the Door Open indicator light .
In the unlikely situation that Model 3 has no power , these electrically powered buttons at the top of the door handles no longer work .
Instead , pull up the manual door release located in front of the window switches on the front doors .
Doors Caution : The manual door release is designed to be used only in situations when Model 3 has no power .
Whenever Model 3 has power , use the button located at the top of the interior door handle .
Interior Locking and Unlocking While sitting inside Model 3 , you can lock and unlock all doors and trunks by touching the lock icon on the touchscreen .
The icon changes to indicate whether doors are locked or unlocked .
You can also unlock the doors by pressing the Park button on the end of the gear selector a second time .
Pressing this button once engages the Park gear and pressing it again unlocks the doors .
Walk-Away Door Lock Doors and trunks can automatically lock whenever you walk away carrying your authenticated phone .
When the doors lock , the exterior lights flash once and the mirrors fold ( if equipped with the premium package and Fold Mirrors is on ) .
• You are not using an authenticated phone as the key and walk away carrying the key card or key fob .
When using the key card you must manually lock Model 3 by tapping the key card against the door pillar .
When using the key fob ( sold as an accessory ) , you must manually lock Model 3 by pressing the lock button .
Note : If all doors are closed and Model 3 was automatically unlocked by your authenticated phone , walk-away locking is temporarily suspended for one minute .
If you open a door within this minute , it will not re-lock until all the doors are closed and you have walked away with the authenticated phone .
Child-Protection Lock Model 3 has child-protection locks on the rear doors to prevent them from being opened using the interior release buttons .
Note : It is recommended that you turn child- protection locks on whenever children are seated in the rear seats .
Unlock on Park When you stop Model 3 and engage the Park gear , you can choose to unlock all doors .
Note : If set to OFF , you can unlock all doors by pressing the Park button a second time after engaging the Park gear .
Opening and Closing 13 Windows Opening and Closing Press down on a switch to lower the associated window .
Window switches operate at two levels : • To lower a window fully , press the switch all the way down and immediately release .
• To lower a window partially , press the switch gently and release when the window is where you want it .
Locking Rear Windows To prevent passengers from using the rear window switches , touch Controls > Quick Controls > Window Lock .
To unlock the rear windows , touch Window Lock again .
Warning : To ensure safety , it is recommended that you lock the rear window switches whenever children are seated in the rear seats .
Calibrating Windows In the unlikely event that a window behaves unexpectedly ( touches the bright molding , fails to open or close properly , goes down more than normal when the door opens , etc .
Close the door with the affected window .
Sit in the driver 's seat and close the driver door .
Use the driver window switch to raise the affected window until it stalls .
Use the driver window switch to lower the affected window until it stalls .
Use the driver window switch to raise the affected window until it stalls .
The window should now be calibrated .
If the issue continues after attempting the calibration procedure a couple times , contact Tesla .
To raise a window partially , pull the switch gently and release when the window is where you want it .
Failure to do so can cause serious injury .
14 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Rear Trunk Opening To open the rear trunk , do one of the following then pull the rear trunk open : • Touch the associated OPEN button on the touchscreen .
When a door or trunk is open , the touchscreen displays the Door Open indicator light .
To open the trunk from inside Model 3 in the unlikely situation that Model 3 has no power , see Interior Emergency Trunk Release on page 16 .
Warning : Before opening or closing the rear trunk , it is important to check that the area around the trunk is free of obstacles ( people and objects ) .
Load Limits Secure all cargo before moving Model 3 , and place heavy cargo in the lower trunk compartment .
Closing To close the rear trunk , push it downward until you hear the latch click into place .
Note : Model 3 is equipped with pull cups to assist with lowering the rear trunk .
Warning : Before driving , ensure that the trunk is securely latched in the fully- closed position by lifting up on the bottom edge and confirming there is no movement .
Accessing the Cargo Area To access the cargo area inside the rear trunk , pull up the strap at the rear of the cargo cover .
You can then fold the cargo cover forward or remove it from Model 3 .
Opening and Closing 15 Rear Trunk Interior Emergency Trunk Release An illuminated mechanical release located inside the rear trunk allows you to open the rear trunk from the inside if Model 3 has no electrical power .
This mechanical release also allows a person locked inside to get out .
Firmly push the illuminated button in the direction of the arrow to release the latch .
Note : The button glows for several hours after a brief exposure to ambient light .
Warning : Do not allow children to play inside the trunk or become locked inside .
An unrestrained child could suffer serious injury or death in a crash .
A child could suffer heat exhaustion if trapped in the vehicle , especially without climate control on .
Ensure that the area around the hood is free of obstacles .
Touch the associated OPEN button on the touchscreen , double-click the front trunk button on the keyfob accessory , or touch the front trunk button on the mobile app .
When a door or trunk is open , the touchscreen displays the Door Open indicator light .
Warning : Before opening or closing the hood , it is important to check that the area around the hood is free of obstacles ( people and objects ) .
Failure to do so may result in damage or serious injury .
Closing The Model 3 hood is not heavy enough to latch under its own weight and applying pressure on the front edge or center of the hood can cause damage .
Lower the hood until the striker touches the latches .
Place both hands on the front of the hood in the areas shown ( in green ) , then press down firmly to engage the latches .
Carefully try to lift the front edge of the hood to ensure that it is fully closed .
Applying pressure to the red areas can cause damage .
Doing so applies concentrated force in one area and can result in a dent or crease .
• Do not apply pressure to the front edge of the hood .
Doing so can crease the edge .
Warning : Before driving , you must ensure that the hood is securely latched in the fully closed position by carefully trying to lift the front edge of the hood upward and confirming there is no movement .
Interior Emergency Release An illuminated interior release button inside the front trunk allows a person locked inside to get out .
Opening and Closing 17 Front Trunk 18 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Press the interior release button to open the front trunk , then push up on the hood .
Note : The interior release button glows following a brief exposure to ambient light .
Warning : People should never climb inside the front trunk .
Never shut the front trunk when a person is inside .
Warning : Care should be taken to ensure that objects inside the front trunk do not bump against the release button , causing the trunk to accidentally open .
Opening with No Power In the unlikely event that Model 3 has no 12V power , you will be unable to open the front trunk using the touchscreen or mobile app .
To open the front trunk in this situation : Note : The following will not open the front trunk if Model 3 is locked and has 12V power .
Pull the two wires out of the tow eye opening to expose both terminals .
Note : Applying external 12V power to these terminals only releases the hood latches .
You can not charge the 12V battery using these terminals .
The hood latches are immediately released and you can now open the hood to access the front trunk area .
Release the tow eye cover by pressing firmly on the top right perimeter of the cover until it pivots inward , then gently pulling the raised section toward you .
Note : Depending on production date , either the positive or negative terminal may be attached to the tow eye cover .
Otherwise , replace the tow eye cover by inserting the wires into the tow eye opening and aligning the tow eye cover into position and turning it into place .
Opening and Closing 19 Interior Storage and Electronics Glovebox To open the glovebox , touch Controls > Glovebox on the bottom corner of the touchscreen .
The glovebox automatically opens and its light turns on .
To close the glovebox , push it upward until it clicks into its closed position .
Note : If you leave the glovebox open for approximately five minutes , its light automatically turns off .
It does not lock when Model 3 is locked by touching the lock icon on the touchscreen .
Warning : When driving , keep the glovebox closed to prevent injury to a passenger if a collision or sudden stop occurs .
Center Console - Premium Package In addition to housing an RFID transmitter that reads the key card ( see Key Card on page 8 ) , the center console includes cup holders , two storage compartments , and a phone dock for two phones ( or other devices ) .
To open the main storage compartment , pull its cover upward .
Open the other storage compartment or access the phone dock by pressing firmly near the cover 's opening edge .
USB Ports - Premium Package Model 3 has two USB ports located in the front compartment of the center console .
These ports can be used to connect and charge your phone ( see Installing Phone Charging Cable on page 21 ) as well as play audio files stored on the phone or on a USB device ( see Playing Media from Devices on page 114 ) .
Open the center console door below the touchscreen and lift the phone dock upward to access the USB ports .
Two additional USB ports are located in the rear of the center console .
Passengers in the rear seats can use these ports to charge their USB-connected devices .
Media Player does not communicate with the rear USB ports .
20 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Interior Storage and Electronics Note : Power is available whenever the vehicle is considered `` awake '' The vehicle may be awake for many reasons .
For example , when using features such as Summon , or when features such as Cabin Overheat Protection , Keep Climate On , Dog Mode , Sentry Mode , etc .
The vehicle is also awake whenever the 12V battery is being charged or is in use , during HV charging , when the vehicle is communicating with the mobile app , etc .
Leaving an accessory plugged in does not deplete the 12V battery .
Note : Always use USB 2.0 compliant cables when connecting devices to the USB ports .
Using non-compliant cables can result in slower charging and , if plugged into either of the front two ports , can result in potential connection problems when trying to access media files on the device .
This can prevent connected devices from charging or from being recognized by Media Player .
Installing Phone Charging Cable To make it easy to connect your phone while keeping the console free of clutter , you can install a phone charging cable in Model 3 .
Open both center console doors in front of the cup holders .
Remove the rubber mat from the phone dock .
Lift the phone dock to access the USB ports .
Release the cover from the base of the phone dock by sliding it to the left .
Plug the USB connector on the phone charging cable into a USB port .
Insert the phone end of the charging cable through the bottom of the phone dock and route the cable through the securing tabs towards the bottom of the phone dock .
Reinstall the cover to the base of the phone dock by sliding it to the right .
Lower the phone dock and reinstall the rubber mat .
Rear Console Your Model 3 has a rear console integrated in the center of the rear seat back .
Pull the console down to access the rear cup holders , or use it as an armrest .
Note : Power is available whenever the vehicle is considered `` awake '' The vehicle may be awake for many reasons .
For example , when using features such as Summon , or when features such as Cabin Overheat Protection , Keep Climate On , Dog Mode , Sentry Mode , etc .
The vehicle is also awake whenever the 12V battery is being charged or is in use , during HV charging , when the vehicle is communicating with the mobile app , etc .
Leaving an accessory plugged in does not deplete the 12V battery .
However , if you do use a non-Tesla accessory and notice any malfunctions or unexpected behavior , such as indicator lights , alert messages , or excessive heat from the accessory , unplug the accessory from the 12V power socket immediately .
Doing so can result in damage .
Coat Hangers Your Model 3 has a coat hanger on each side of the vehicle in the rear row .
Push the coat hanger to release it .
Push it again to retract it .
Additional Interior Storage Areas Your Model 3 has these additional storage areas : • • Storage compartments are located below the armrest on the door panels .
If equipped with the premium package , storage pockets are located at the back of the front seats .
The camera is not currently active , but might be used in potential future features which could be added to Model 3 with software releases .
Keep the camera lens clean , and free of obstructions .
Remove any buildup of dirt or dust by occasionally wiping the camera lens with a soft damp cloth .
Doing so can damage the surface of the camera lens .
Opening and Closing 23 Front and Rear Seats Correct Driving Position The seat , head support , seat belt and airbags work together to maximize your safety .
Using these correctly ensures greater protection .
Position the seat so you can wear the seat belt correctly , while being as far away from the front airbag as possible : 1 .
Sit upright with both feet on the floor and the seat back reclined no more than 30 degrees .
Make sure you can easily reach the pedals and that your arms are slightly bent when holding the steering wheel .
Place the shoulder section of the seat belt mid-way between your neck and your shoulder .
Fit the lap section of the belt tightly across your hips , not across your stomach .
Model 3 seats include integrated head supports that can not be adjusted or removed .
Warning : Riding in a moving vehicle with the seat back reclined can result in serious injuries in a collision , as you could slide under the lap belt or be propelled into the seat belt .
Ensure your seat back is reclined no more than 30 degrees when the vehicle is moving .
Before folding , remove items from the seats and the rear footwell .
To allow the rear seat backs to fold completely flat , you may need to move the front seats forward .
To fold a rear seat , pull the corresponding lever and fold the seat forward .
Raising Rear Seats Before raising a rear seat , make sure that the seat belts are not trapped behind the backrest .
Pull the seat back upward until it locks into place .
To confirm that the seat back is locked in the upright position , try pulling it forward .
Warning : Always ensure the seat backs are locked in their upright position .
Failure to do so increases the risk of injury .
Head Supports The front seats and outer rear seats include integrated head supports that are not adjustable .
The rear center seat includes an adjustable head support that can be raised , lowered , or removed .
The head support should always be raised and locked into position ( so that the center is aligned with the center of the ears ) when occupied by a passenger that is not in a child safety seat .
The head support in the rear center seat should always be lowered when a seat belt retained child safety seat is installed .
Warning : Ensure that all head supports are positioned correctly before sitting in , or operating , Model 3 to minimize the risk of severe injury or death in the event of a collision .
Raising/Lowering the Rear Center Head Support To raise the head support , lift it until you hear it click into place .
Push down on the head support to ensure that it is secure .
To lower the head support , press and hold the button on the outer base of the right post and press the head support down .
Seating and Safety Restraints 25 Front and Rear Seats Removing/Installing the Rear Center Head Support To remove the head support : 1 .
Raise the head support as described above .
Press and hold the button on the outer base of the right post .
Insert a short , flat object ( such as a small flat-head screwdriver ) into the opening on the inside base of the left post and pull the head support upward .
Warning : To avoid burns resulting from prolonged use , individuals who have peripheral neuropathy , or whose capacity to feel pain is limited because of diabetes , age , neurological injury , or some other condition , should exercise caution when using the climate control system and seat heaters .
Doing so could restrict deployment of the seat-mounted side air bags if a collision occurs .
It can also reduce the accuracy of the occupant detection system .
With the front of the head support facing forward , insert both posts into the corresponding holes on the seat back .
Press down on the head support until it clicks into place .
Pull up on the head support to ensure that it is secure .
Warning : Ensure that the head support is correctly installed before seating an occupant in the rear center seat .
Failure to do so increases the risk of injury or death if a collision occurs .
26 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Seat Belts Wearing Seat Belts Using seat belts and child safety seats is the most effective way to protect occupants if a collision occurs .
Both the driver and passenger seats are equipped with three-point inertia reel seat belts .
Inertia reel belts are automatically tensioned to allow occupants to move comfortably during normal driving conditions .
To securely hold child safety seats , all passenger seating positions are equipped with an automatic locking retractor ( ALR ) that , by pulling the seat belt beyond the length needed for a typical adult occupant , locks the belt into place until the seat belt is unbuckled .
The seat belt reel automatically locks to prevent movement of occupants if Model 3 experiences a force associated with hard acceleration , braking , cornering , or an impact in a collision .
Seat Belt Reminders The seat belt reminder on the touchscreen alerts you if a seat belt for an occupied driver or passenger seat is unbuckled .
If the belt remains unbuckled , the reminder flashes and an intermittent chime sounds .
If all occupants are buckled up and the reminder stays on , re-buckle seat belts to ensure they are correctly latched .
If the reminder light continues to stay on , contact Tesla .
You can temporarily mute a seat belt reminder associated with a rear seating position .
This is useful in situations when you are carrying an object in a rear seat that triggers the seat belt reminder alert .
To mute the reminder , touch the associated seat on the seat belt reminder card that displays on the touchscreen when a seat belt reminder alert is active .
Touch the seat again to unmute the reminder .
The reminder is disabled for the current drive only .
Warning : Seat belts must be worn by passengers in all seating positions .
Do not disable a seat belt reminder when the seating position is occupied by a passenger .
Draw the belt out smoothly , ensuring the belt lays flat across the pelvis , chest and mid-point of your collar bone , between the neck and shoulder .
Insert the latch plate into the buckle and press together until you hear a click indicating it is locked in place .
Pull the belt to check that it is securely fastened .
Pull the diagonal part of the belt toward the reel to remove excess slack .
To Adjust the Shoulder Anchor Height Model 3 is equipped with an adjustable shoulder anchor for each front seat to ensure that the seat belt is positioned correctly .
The seat belt should lay flat across the mid-point of your collar bone while in the correct driving position ( see Correct Driving Position on page 24 ) .
Adjust the height of the shoulder anchor if the seat belt is not positioned correctly : 1 .
Press and hold the button on the shoulder anchor to release the locking mechanism .
While holding the button , move the shoulder anchor up or down as necessary so that the seat belt is positioned correctly .
Release the button on the shoulder anchor so that it locks into position .
Without pressing the button , pull on the seat belt webbing and attempt to move the shoulder anchor downwards to check that it is locked into position .
Warning : Ensure that the seat belt is positioned correctly and that the shoulder anchor is locked into position before driving .
Riding in a moving vehicle with the seat belt positioned incorrectly or with the shoulder anchor not locked into position can reduce the effectiveness of the seat belt in a collision .
To Release a Belt Hold the belt near the buckle to prevent the belt from retracting too quickly , then press the button on the buckle .
Ensure there is no obstruction that prevents the belt from fully retracting .
The belt should not hang loose .
Wearing Seat Belts When Pregnant Do not put the lap or shoulder sections of the seat belt over the abdominal area .
Wear the lap section of the belt as low as possible across the hips , not the waist .
Position the shoulder portion of the belt between the breasts and to the side of the abdomen .
Consult your doctor for specific guidance .
Seat Belt Pre-tensioners The front seat belts are equipped with pre‐tensioners that work in conjunction with the airbags in a severe frontal collision .
The pre‐tensioners automatically retract both the seat belt anchor and the seat belt webbing , reducing slack in both the lap and diagonal portions of the belts , resulting in reduced forward movement of the occupant .
The rear outboard seats are equipped with shoulder pre-tensioners to retract the seat belt webbing to reduce forward movement of the occupant .
If the pre-tensioners and airbags did not activate in an impact , this does not mean they malfunctioned .
It usually means that the strength or type of force needed to activate them was not present .
Testing Seat Belts To confirm that seat belts are operating correctly , perform these three simple checks on each seat belt .
Warning : Never place anything between you and the seat belt to cushion the impact in the event of a collision .
With the seat belt fastened , give the webbing nearest the buckle a quick pull .
The buckle should remain securely locked .
With the belt unfastened , unreel the webbing to its limit .
Check that unreeling is free from snags , and visually check the webbing for wear .
Allow the webbing to retract , checking that retraction is smooth and complete .
With the webbing half unreeled , hold the tongue plate and pull forward quickly .
The mechanism should lock automatically and prevent further unreeling .
Seat Belt Warnings Warning : Seat belts should be worn by all occupants at all times , even if driving for a very short distance .
Failure to do so increases the risk of injury or death if a collision occurs .
Always follow the child safety seat manufacturer 's instructions when installing .
Warning : Ensure that all seat belts are worn correctly .
An improperly worn seat belt increases the risk of injury or death if a collision occurs .
The pressure from the seat belt on such items can cause injury .
Warning : Seat belts should not be worn with any part of the strap twisted .
Warning : Each seat belt assembly must be used by one occupant only .
Warning : Seat belts that have been worn in a collision must be inspected or replaced by Tesla , even if damage to the assembly is not obvious .
Warning : Seat belts that show signs of wear ( such as fraying ) , or have been cut or damaged in any way , must be replaced by Tesla .
If a seat belt fails to retract or latch into the buckle , it must be replaced immediately .
Warning : Do not make modifications or additions that can prevent a seat belt mechanism from taking up slack , or that can prevent a seat belt from being adjusted to remove slack .
Warning : Do not make modifications that can interfere with the operation of a seat belt , or that can cause a seat belt to become inoperable .
Warning : When seat belts are not in use , they should be fully retracted and not hanging loose .
Seating and Safety Restraints 29 Child Safety Seats Guidelines for Seating Children Your Model 3 seat belts in the front and second row seats are designed for adults and larger children .
You must restrain infants and small children in the second row seats only , and you must use a suitable child safety seat appropriate for the child ’ s age , weight , and size .
Never use child safety seats in the front row passenger seat .
DEATH or SERIOUS INJURY to the child can occur .
Refer to the following label fitted to the sun visors .
Note : The image ( s ) shown below are representative only and may not be identical to the labels in your vehicle .
The following table is based on child safety seat recommendations determined by National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) .
* Many child safety seats currently available allow children to ride rear-facing using the child safety seat ’ s integrated 5-point harness for a longer period of time BASED UPON SPECIFIC HEIGHT AND WEIGHT LIMITS .
Keep your child in a rear facing seat for as long as possible .
CHECK THE CHILD SAFETY SEAT MANUFACTURER ’ S INSTRUCTIONS AND CAREFULLY FOLLOW ALL INSTRUCTIONS ** LATCH - Lower Anchors and Tethers for Children .
*** Subject to instructions provided by the child safety seat manufacturer .
Warning : Laws that govern how and where children should be carried when traveling in a vehicle are subject to change .
Warning : Do not use Isofix/i-Size anchors with child restraint system or booster seats that have an integral safety belt where the combined weight of the child plus the child restraint system exceeds 65 lbs ( 29.5 kg ) .
Seating and Safety Restraints 31 Child Safety Seats Seating Larger Children If a child is too large to fit into a child safety seat , but too small to safely fit into the standard seat belts , use a booster seat appropriate for the child ’ s age and size .
Installing Child Safety Seats There are two general methods used to install child safety seats : • Seat belt retained - these seats are secured using the vehicle ’ s seat belts ( see Installing Seat Belt Retained Child Seats ) .
Check the child safety seat manufacturer ’ s instructions and the table at Child Safety Seats to determine which installation method to use .
Some child safety seats can be installed using either method .
Installing Seat Belt Retained Child Seats First , make sure that the child safety seat is appropriate for the weight , height , and age of the child .
Avoid dressing the child in bulky clothing and do not place any objects between the child and the restraint system .
To securely hold child safety seats , all passenger seating positions are equipped with an automatic locking retractor ( ALR ) that , by pulling the seat belt beyond the length needed for a typical adult occupant , locks the belt into place until the seat belt is unbuckled and the webbing is fully retracted .
The ALR mechanism operates as a ratchet , winding in slack and preventing the seat belt from extending any further until it has been completely rewound .
When installing a child safety seat , engage the belt 's automatic locking retractor by pulling the seat belt webbing until it is fully extended .
The ALR system engages only when the seat belt is at its maximum extension point .
Note : An automatic locking retractor disengages only when the seat belt is unbuckled and fully retracted .
The belt can then be worn as a normal belt , sliding freely in and out and locking tight only in an emergency .
Once disengaged , the belt must be fully extended to re-engage the locking mechanism whenever you install a child safety seat .
Always follow the detailed instructions provided by the child safety seat manufacturer .
Place the child safety seat in Model 3 , and fully extend the seat belt .
Route and buckle the seat belt in accordance with the child safety seat manufacturer ’ s instructions .
Allow the seat belt to retract , and remove all slack in the seat belt while firmly pushing the child safety seat into the Model 3 seat .
If the seat belt retained child safety seat has an upper tether , attach it to the back of the seat ( see Attaching Upper Tether Straps ) .
Installing LATCH Child Seats Lower LATCH anchors are provided in the second row outboard seats .
The anchors are located between the seat 's back rest and rear cushion .
The exact location of each anchor is identified by a child safety seat identification button , illustrated below .
The button is located on the seat back , directly above its associated anchor .
32 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Child Safety Seats In the second row , install LATCH child safety seats in the outboard seating positions only .
Use only a seat belt retained seat in the center position .
To install a LATCH child safety seat , slide the safety seat latches onto the anchor bars until they click into place .
Carefully read and follow the instructions provided by the child safety seat manufacturer .
Attempt to twist the child safety seat from side to side and try to pull it away from the seat , then check to ensure the anchors remain securely in place .
Note : Lower LATCH anchors should not be used with child seats or booster seats that have an integrated safety belt in situations where the combined weight of the child plus the child restraint is more than 65 lbs ( 29.5 kg ) .
Attaching Upper Tether Straps If an upper tether strap is provided , attach its hook to the anchor point located on the shelf behind the rear seats .
Note : The location of anchor points may not be readily visible but can be found by identifying a slice in the seat 's material .
Warning : Tighten upper tether straps according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer of the child safety seat .
Warning : USE ONLY SEAT BELT RETAINED CHILD SAFETY SEATS IN THE CENTER SEATING POSITION .
Seating and Safety Restraints 33 To access an anchor point , press down on the back of its cover .
same side of the head support as the seat belt retraction mechanism ) .
Hold the child safety seat by the belt path and try to slide the safety seat from side to side and front to back .
Tighten the belt or reconnect the LATCH retained child safety seat .
If you are unable to reduce slack , try a different seat location or try another child safety seat .
Do not seat a child on the front passenger seat even if you are using a child safety seat .
This seat has an airbag in front of it .
Although this airbag is disabled when Model 3 detects a lightweight passenger , do not rely on technology to protect your child .
Warning : Child restraint systems are designed to be secured in vehicle seats by lap belts or the lap belt portion of a lap-shoulder belt .
Children could be endangered in a crash if their child restraints are not properly secured in the vehicle .
Warning : According to collision statistics , children are safer when properly restrained in the rear seating positions than in the front seating positions .
Warning : Do not use a forward facing child safety seat until your child weighs over 20 lbs ( 9 kg ) and can sit For a single-strap tether in the center seating position , fully lower the head support ( see Raising/Lowering the Rear Center Head Support on page 25 ) and run the strap over the top center of the head support .
Up to the age of two , a child 's spine and neck are not sufficiently developed to avoid injury in a frontal impact .
All children should be restrained in an appropriate child safety seat at all times .
Warning : To ensure children are safely seated , follow all instructions provided in this document and by the manufacturer of the child safety seat .
Warning : Do not use seat belt extenders on a seat belt that is being used to install a child safety seat or booster seat .
Warning : When seating larger children , make sure the child 's head is supported and the child ’ s seat belt is properly adjusted and fastened .
The shoulder portion of the belt must be away from the face and neck , and the lap portion must not be over the stomach .
Warning : Never attach two child safety seats to one anchor point .
In a collision , one anchor point may be incapable of securing both seats .
Warning : Child restraint anchors are designed to withstand only those loads imposed by correctly fitted child restraints .
Under no circumstances are they to be used for adult seat belts , harnesses , or for attaching other items or equipment to the vehicle .
Warning : Always check harnesses and tether straps for damage and wear .
Have the seat inspected or replaced as described in the child safety seat manufacturer ’ s instructions .
Seating and Safety Restraints 35 Airbags 36 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Location of Airbags Airbags are located in the approximate areas shown here .
Airbag warning information is printed on the sun visors .
Model 3 is equipped with an airbag and lap/shoulder belt at both front outboard seating positions .
The airbag is a supplemental restraint at those seating positions .
All occupants , including the driver , should always wear their seat belts whether or not an airbag is also provided at their seating position to minimize the risk of severe injury or death in the event of a crash .
Curtain airbags Airbags How the Airbags Work Airbags inflate when sensors detect an impact that exceeds deployment thresholds .
These thresholds are designed to predict the severity of a crash in time for the airbags to help protect the vehicle 's occupants .
Airbags inflate instantly with considerable force accompanied by a loud noise .
The inflated bag , together with the seat belts , limits movement of occupants to reduce the risk of injury .
Front airbags are not ordinarily designed to inflate in rear collisions , rollovers , side collisions and when braking heavily or driving over bumps and potholes .
Likewise , front airbags may not inflate in all frontal collisions , such as minor front collisions , underride collisions , or impacts with narrow objects ( such as poles or trees ) .
Significant superficial damage can occur to the vehicle without the airbags inflating and , conversely , a relatively small amount of structural damage can cause airbags to inflate .
Therefore , the external appearance of the vehicle after a collision does not represent whether or not the front airbags should have inflated .
Warning : Before modifying your vehicle to accommodate a person with disabilities in a way that may affect the airbag system , contact Tesla .
Types of Airbags Model 3 has the following types of airbags : • Advanced front airbags : The front airbags are designed to reduce airbag related injuries if children or small adults are riding in the front seats .
On the driver ’ s side , the front airbag works with a seat position sensor that adjusts the inflation level based on the seating position of the occupant .
On the passenger ’ s side , the airbag responds to a sensing system in the seat that determines whether or not the passenger side front airbag inflates , and optimizes the inflation level based on the weight of the occupant .
Follow all warnings related to seating a child on the front passenger seat .
The knee airbags limit the forward motion of the front seat occupants by restricting leg movement , thereby positioning the occupants so that the front airbags work more effectively .
The seat-mounted side airbags on both the impacted and non-impacted side of the vehicle will inflate in the event of severe side impact or severe offset frontal impact .
Curtain airbags on both the impacted and non-impacted side of the vehicle will inflate only if a severe side impact occurs , or if the vehicle rolls over .
Seating and Safety Restraints 37 Airbags Passenger Front Airbag Model 3 has an occupancy sensor in the front passenger seat that controls the status of the airbags based on the weight of the occupant .
If the passenger airbag is OFF , it will not inflate when a collision occurs , and the passenger airbag off indicator displays in the top corner of the touchscreen .
If the passenger airbag is ON , it will inflate when a collision occurs , and its status does not display in the top corner of the touchscreen .
The Passenger Airbag Off indicator displays in the top corner of the touchscreen only when the front passenger airbag is turned off .
Note : The occupancy sensor system meets the regulatory requirement of FMVSS 208 and automatically detects when inflating the passenger front airbag would be unnecessary or potentially harmful .
If the passenger airbag is permanently on , even when the seat is empty , contact Tesla immediately .
To make sure the sensing system can correctly detect occupancy status , eliminate the following : • Objects lodged under the seat .
• Objects wedged between the seat back and seat cushion .
These conditions can interfere with the occupancy sensor .
If you have eliminated the above possibilities , and the airbag status is still incorrect , ask passengers to ride in the rear seats and contact Tesla to have the airbag system checked .
Note : The front passenger seat ’ s sensing system affects the operation of the passenger front and side airbags only .
The other passenger airbags are not affected .
Warning : Never seat a child on the front passenger seat , even if the passenger airbag is off .
All occupants age 12 and under must ride in the rear seats ( see Child Safety Seats ) .
Warning : To ensure accuracy of the occupant detection system , do not make any modifications to the front passenger seat .
Doing so could restrict deployment of the seat-mounted side air bags if a collision occurs .
It can also reduce the accuracy of the occupant detection system , if equipped .
This powder can irritate the skin and should be thoroughly flushed from the eyes and from any cuts or abrasions .
After inflation , the airbags deflate to provide a gradual cushioning effect for the occupants and to ensure the driver ’ s forward vision is not obscured .
A weight detected near the threshold can cause the airbag status to occasionally turn on and off depending on seating position and physique .
**The absence of the passenger airbag off indicator in the top corner of the touchscreen indicates that the passenger airbag is ON and will inflate in the event of a collision .
Note : It takes approximately six seconds after you power on Model 3 for the occupancy sensor to report accurate status of the front passenger airbag .
As a result , when you first power on Model 3 , even in situations when it should be OFF because the passenger seat is either empty or carrying a weight of 20 lbs ( 9 kg ) or less , the touchscreen can take up to six seconds to display the passenger airbag off indicator .
If it fails to do so , contact Tesla service immediately and seat passengers in the rear seating positions only .
38 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Airbags If airbags have inflated , or if your vehicle has been in a collision , your vehicle requires servicing before it will power up .
Note : In some collision situations , even if airbags have not inflated , your vehicle 's high voltage Battery may be disabled and you will be unable to power up and drive .
Airbag Warning Indicator The airbag indicator on the touchscreen remains lit if the airbag system is malfunctioning .
The only time this indicator should light up is briefly when Model 3 first powers up , in which case it turns off within a few seconds .
If it remains lit , contact Tesla immediately and do not drive .
Airbag Warnings Warning : Do not place objects over or near airbags because any such objects could cause harm if the vehicle is in a crash severe enough to cause the airbag to inflate .
Warning : All occupants , including the driver , should always wear their seat belts , whether or not an airbag is also provided at their seating position , to minimize the risk of severe injury or death in the event of a collision .
Warning : Front seat occupants should not place their arms over the airbag module , as an inflating airbag can cause fractures or other injuries .
Warning : Airbags inflate with considerable speed and force , which can cause injury .
To limit injuries , ensure that occupants are wearing seat belts and are correctly seated , with the seat positioned as far back as possible .
Warning : Do not use a child safety seat or seat young children on a seat with an operational airbag in front of it .
Doing so can cause injury or death if the airbag inflates .
Warning : To ensure correct inflation of the side airbags , maintain an unobstructed gap between an occupant ’ s torso and the side of Model 3 .
Doing so can cause injury if a curtain airbag inflates .
Warning : Do not allow passengers to obstruct the operation of an airbag by placing feet , knees or any other part of the body on or near an airbag .
Warning : Do not attach or place objects on or near the front airbags , the side of the front seats , the headliner at the side of the vehicle , or any other airbag cover that could interfere with inflation of an airbag .
Objects can cause serious injury if the vehicle is in a collision severe enough to cause the airbag to inflate .
Do not touch until they have cooled .
Your profile also saves some of the preferences you make using the touchscreen 's Controls window .
To add a new driver profile , touch the driver profile icon at the top of the touchscreen .
Then touch Add New Driver , type the driver 's name and touch Create Profile .
Follow the onscreen instructions to save the seating position to the driver profile .
You can also check the Use Easy Entry checkbox if you want to save ( or use existing ) Easy Entry settings ( described below ) in which the driver 's seat and the steering wheel are automatically adjusted to make it easy to enter and exit Model 3 .
If you change the position of the steering wheel , driver ’ s seat , or driver ’ s side mirror after you have saved or chosen a driver profile , the touchscreen prompts you to save the new position or restore the previously saved position ( other settings are automatically saved ) .
The saved adjustments are automatically made .
Note : To stop automatic adjustments that are in process based on a driver 's profile , touch Stop on the Driver Profile dropdown menu .
Automatic adjustments also stop if you manually adjust a seat , mirror or the steering wheel .
Easy Entry You can define an Easy Entry setting that moves the steering wheel and driver 's seat to make it easy to enter and exit Model 3 .
Any driver can use the Easy Entry setting by associating it with their driver 's profile .
When the Easy Entry setting is associated with a driver 's profile , the steering wheel and driver 's seat automatically adjust when the park gear is engaged and the driver 's seat belt is unbuckled , allowing an easy exit from the vehicle .
When returning to the vehicle and stepping on the brake pedal , settings automatically adjust back to the settings used by the most recent driver profile .
To use Easy Entry with a driver profile , ensure the Use Easy Entry box is checked .
Then choose the driver and Model 3 is adjusted based on the settings that have been saved to the chosen driver profile .
See What 's Saved To see what settings are associated with a driver profile , touch the driver profile icon on the top of the touchscreen .
A popup window lists all the settings that are saved to driver profiles .
Note : The settings that are associated with driver profiles may vary depending on the version of software currently installed on your Model 3 .
Maximum acceleration and power are limited .
Front trunk and glovebox are locked .
Home and Work locations are not available in the navigation system .
The Allow Mobile Access setting is disabled .
When Model 3 is in Valet mode , you can not pair new Bluetooth devices or view or delete existing paired devices .
Starting Valet Mode With Model 3 in Park , touch the driver profile icon on the top of the touchscreen , then touch Valet Mode .
The first time you enter Valet mode , you will be prompted to create a 4-digit PIN that you will use to cancel Valet mode .
When Valet mode is active , the touchscreen displays the word Valet above the driving speed and the Valet mode driver profile displays on the touchscreen .
You can also use the mobile app to start and cancel Valet mode ( provided Model 3 is in Park ) .
When using the mobile app , you do not need to enter a PIN because you are already required to log into the app using your Tesla Account credentials .
Note : If the PIN to Drive setting is enabled ( see PIN to Drive on page 120 ) , you must enter the driving PIN before you can define or enter a Valet PIN .
Once in Valet mode , Model 3 can be driven without the valet needing to enter the driving PIN .
Note : The PIN to Drive setting is not available when Valet mode is active .
If you forget your valet PIN , reset it from inside Model 3 by entering your Tesla Account credentials ( which also cancels Valet mode ) .
You can also reset your PIN using the mobile app .
Canceling Valet Mode With Model 3 in Park , touch the Valet Mode driver icon on the touchscreen 's status bar , then enter your 4-digit PIN .
When you cancel Valet mode , all settings associated with the most recently used driver profile and climate control settings are restored , and all features are available .
Note : You do not need to enter a PIN to cancel Valet mode from the mobile app .
Steering Wheel Scroll Buttons A scroll button is located on each side of the steering wheel .
Use your thumb to press this button to the right or left .
You can also press the button or roll it up or down .
Note : The arrows associated with the scroll buttons are backlit in low ambient lighting conditions .
To restart the touchscreen , press and hold both scroll buttons until after the touchscreen turns black , releasing when the Tesla logo appears .
Use the left scroll buttons on the steering wheel to move the steering wheel to the desired position : • To adjust the height/tilt angle of the steering wheel , roll the left scroll button up or down .
• To move the steering wheel closer to you , or further away from you , press the left scroll button to the left or right .
Press the scroll button to mute/unmute the volume , roll the scroll button up to increase the volume , or down to decrease the volume .
Note : The scroll button adjusts the volume for media , navigation instructions or phone calls based on what is currently in use .
As you adjust volume , the touchscreen displays the volume level and whether you are adjusting volume for media , navigation or phone calls .
Push the scroll button to the left to return to the previous selection .
Warning : Do not make steering wheel adjustments while driving .
Adjusting Steering Effort You can adjust the feel and sensitivity of the steering system to suit your personal preference : • Speak a voice command .
• Standard - Tesla believes that this setting offers the best handling and response in all conditions .
The only way to really know which option you like best is to try them .
Horn To sound the horn , press the center pad on the steering wheel .
You can choose which mirror you would like to adjust by selecting Left or Right on the touchscreen .
Use the left scroll button on the steering wheel to adjust the mirror to its desired position : Note : You can also press the left scroll button to change which mirror you are adjusting .
• To move the mirror up or down , roll the left scroll button up or down .
• To move the mirror inward or outward , press the left scroll button to the left or right .
Auto-Fold Mirrors Based on Location Model 3 can automatically fold and unfold the side mirrors based on location , which saves you from having to manually position them each time you need to fold or unfold the mirrors when at a frequented place ( such as narrow garages , tight parking spaces , etc . ) .
Caution : Mirrors may not automatically fold or unfold if you return to a saved location and are driving faster than 3 mph/5 kph .
Mirror Auto Tilt - Premium Package If equipped with the premium package , both exterior mirrors can automatically tilt downward when Model 3 is shifted into Reverse .
Mirror Auto Fold - Premium Package If equipped with the premium package , both exterior mirrors can automatically fold inward whenever you exit and lock Model 3 .
Rear View Mirror The rear view mirror is adjusted manually .
Except when in Reverse , the rear view mirror automatically dims in proportion to the level of glare from the headlights of a vehicle behind you .
The driver ’ s side mirror automatically dims in low lighting conditions ( for example , when driving at night or through a tunnel ) in proportion to the level of glare from the headlights of a vehicle behind you ( except when in Reverse ) .
If equipped with the premium package , both exterior mirrors have heaters that turn on and off with the rear window defroster .
You can fold the mirrors inward for parking in tight spaces by touching Controls > Quick Controls > Fold .
Mirrors Vanity Mirrors To expose and illuminate the vanity mirror , fold the sun visor downwards , then use the tab to lower the mirror cover .
When you close the mirror cover , the light turns off .
Driving 45 Starting and Powering Off Starting When you open a door , Model 3 powers on the touchscreen and you can operate all controls .
PRESS THE BRAKE PEDAL - Model 3 powers on and is ready to drive .
SELECT A GEAR - Move the gear lever all the way down for Drive and all the way up for Reverse .
Note : If the PIN to Drive feature is enabled ( see PIN to Drive on page 120 ) , you must also enter a valid PIN on the touchscreen before you can drive Model 3 .
Note : If Passive Entry is off and you do not press the brake pedal to start Model 3 within approximately five minutes , a message displays on the touchscreen and you must use the key to lock then unlock Model 3 again before starting the vehicle .
Everything you need to know when driving Model 3 displays on the touchscreen .
Drive Disabled - Requires Authentication If Model 3 does not detect a key when you press the brake ( an authenticated phone is not detected , or 30 seconds has passed since you used the key card ) , the touchscreen displays a message telling you that driving requires authentication .
If you see this message , place the key card behind the cup holders on the top of the center console where the RFID transmitter can read it .
The 30 second authentication window restarts and you can start Model 3 by pressing the brake pedal .
A number of factors can affect whether Model 3 can detect an authenticated phone ( for example , the phone 's battery is low or dead and is no longer able to communicate using Bluetooth ) .
Always keep your authenticated phone and a key card with you .
After driving , your authenticated phone or key card is needed to restart Model 3 after it powers off .
And when you leave Model 3 , you must bring your authenticated phone or key card with you to lock Model 3 , either manually or automatically .
Powering Off When you finish driving , shift into Park by pressing the button on the end of the gear selector .
The parking brake automatically engages and all systems keep operating .
When you leave Model 3 with your authenticated phone and key card , it powers off automatically , turning off the touchscreen .
Although usually not needed , you can power off Model 3 while sitting in the driver ’ s seat , provided the vehicle is not moving .
Model 3 automatically powers back on again if you press the brake pedal or touch the touchscreen .
Note : Model 3 automatically shifts into Park whenever it is determined that you are exiting the vehicle , even when you shift into Neutral before exiting .
Restarting the Touchscreen If your touchscreen is unresponsive or demonstrates unusual behavior , you can restart it .
Warning : Only restart the touchscreen while the vehicle is stopped and in Park .
will not be visible during the restart .
Hold down both scroll buttons on the steering wheel until the touchscreen turns black and the Tesla logo appears .
If the touchscreen is still unresponsive or demonstrating unusual behavior after a few minutes , contact Tesla .
Driving 47 Gears Shifting Gears When Model 3 is in Park , you must press the brake to shift to another gear .
Move the lever up or down to change gears .
If you try to shift into a gear that the current driving speed prohibits , a chime sounds and the gear does not change .
Reverse Push the lever all the way up and release .
Neutral Push the lever up or down to the first position and hold it there for more than 1 second to shift into Neutral .
Neutral allows Model 3 to roll freely when you are not pressing the brake pedal .
Drive Push the lever all the way down and release .
Push the lever all the way down twice in quick succession to enable Autosteer ( see Autosteer on page 75 ) .
Park Press the end of the gear selector while Model 3 is stopped .
Model 3 automatically shifts into Park whenever you connect a charge cable or if two or more of the following conditions are met simultaneously : • The driver 's seat belt is unbuckled .
• The occupancy sensor in the driver 's seat does not detect an occupant .
Note : The above conditions do not reflect a comprehensive list of reasons why Model 3 may automatically shift into Park and , in certain scenarios , it is possible for your vehicle to shift into Park when only one of the above conditions is true .
To make it convenient to pick up passengers , you can also unlock all doors at any time by shifting into Park then pressing the Park button a second time .
In addition to the lights that you can control from the touchscreen , Model 3 has convenience lights that operate automatically based on what you are doing .
They turn off after a minute or two or when you shift into a driving gear or lock Model 3 .
Note : The image below is provided for demonstration purposes only .
Depending on vehicle options , software version and market region , your touchscreen may appear slightly different .
• OFF : Exterior lights turn off until you manually turn them back on or until the next time you drive .
Note : Any exterior lights ( for example , daytime running lights ) that are required to remain on in your market region will turn on whenever a driving gear ( Drive or Reverse ) is engaged .
These lights automatically turn on whenever Model 3 is powered on and a driving gear ( Drive or Reverse ) is engaged .
Warning : Always ensure that your headlights are on during low visibility conditions .
When on , fog lights operate whenever low beam headlights are on .
When headlights are turned off , fog lights also turn off .
If set to AUTO , all interior dome lights turn on when you unlock Model 3 , open a door upon exiting , or shift into Park .
You can also manually turn an individual dome light on or off by pressing its lens .
If Model 3 was already powered off when you manually turned the light on , it turns off after 60 minutes .
If you turn on AMBIENT LIGHTS , interior ambient lights turn on whenever the headlights are on ( if equipped ) .
If off , they do not turn on when headlights are on .
When set to AUTO , exterior lights automatically turn on when driving in low lighting conditions .
If you change to a different setting , lights always revert to AUTO on your next drive .
If you turn on Auto High Beam , your vehicle automatically switches from high beam headlights to low beam headlights when light is detected in front of Model 3 .
If you turn on Headlights after Exit , the exterior lights remain on for a short period of time after you stop driving and park Model 3 in low lighting conditions .
If you turn on Steering Wheel Lights , the arrows associated with the scroll buttons are backlit in low ambient lighting conditions .
High Beam Headlights Push the left-hand steering column lever away from you and release to turn the high beam headlights on continuously .
To cancel , push the lever away from you again .
To briefly flash the high beam headlights , pull the lever towards you and release .
The high beam headlights can automatically switch to low beam when there is light detected in front of Model 3 ( for example , from an oncoming vehicle ) .
Note : Your chosen setting is retained until you manually change it .
In situations where Auto High Beam is turned on but the high beams are turned off because light is detected in front of Model 3 , you can temporarily turn on the high beams by pulling the lever toward you .
The following indicator lights are visible on the touchscreen to show the status of the headlights : Low beam headlights are on .
High beam headlights are on and Auto High Beam is disabled or currently unavailable .
Auto High Beam is enabled and high beams are on .
Model 3 is ready to turn off the high beams if light is detected .
Auto High Beam is enabled but high beams are not on because light is detected in front of Model 3 .
When light is no longer detected , high beams automatically turn back on .
Warning : Auto High Beam is an aid only and is subject to limitations .
It is the driver 's responsibility to make sure that the headlights are appropriately adjusted for weather conditions and driving circumstances .
Headlights After Exit When Headlights after Exit is on , the exterior headlights remain on when you stop driving and park Model 3 in low lighting conditions .
They automatically turn off after one minute or when Model 3 locks .
When off , headlights turn off when you engage the Park gear and open a door .
Headlight Adjustments To adjust the angle of the headlights , touch Controls > Service > Adjust Headlights , then follow the onscreen instructions .
You can choose which headlight you would like to adjust by selecting it on the touchscreen .
Tesla has carefully calibrated the position of the headlights to be in an optimum position for most driving scenarios .
Tesla recommends that you do not adjust headlights unless you are familiar with how headlights should be adjusted .
Once adjusted , you will be unable to automatically restore them to their originally calibrated position .
Turn Signals The turn signals flash three times or continuously , depending on how far up or down you move the lever .
The turn signals stop operating when canceled by the steering wheel or after moving the lever in the opposite direction .
The corresponding turn signal indicator lights up on the touchscreen when a turn signal is operating .
Warning : If you have purchased an optional Autopilot package and Traffic- Aware Cruise Control is active , engaging a turn signal can cause Model 3 to accelerate when using Traffic-Aware Cruise Control in specific situations ( see Overtake Acceleration on page 73 ) .
Hazard Warning Flashers To turn on the hazard warning flashers , press the button located above the rear view mirror .
Press the button again to turn off the hazard warning flashers .
Driving 51 Car Status Overview The touchscreen displays the status of Model 3 at all times .
When Model 3 is parked , the status area shows the gear , estimated range , and an overhead view of the car with buttons you can touch to open the trunks and charge port door .
When you press the brake , Model 3 powers up and indicator lights flash briefly along the top .
If an indicator light fails to turn on or off , contact Tesla .
Note : The following image is provided for demonstration purposes only .
Depending on vehicle options , software version , and market region , the information displayed may be slightly different .
Indicator Lights The following indicator lights illuminate to advise you or alert you of a specific status or condition .
A brake system fault is detected or the brake fluid level is low .
The parking brake is manually applied .
A seat belt for an occupied seat is not fastened .
If this indicator does not flash on briefly when Model 3 prepares to drive , or if it remains on , contact Tesla immediately .
High beam headlights are on and Auto High Beam is disabled or currently unavailable .
Auto High Beam is enabled and high beams are on .
Model 3 is ready to turn off the high beams if light is detected .
52 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Car Status Auto High Beam is enabled but high beams are not on because light is detected in front of Model 3 .
When light is no longer detected , high beams automatically turn back on .
This indicator flashes amber when the electronic stability control systems are actively minimizing wheel spin by controlling brake pressure and motor power .
Electronic stability control systems are no longer minimizing wheel spin .
Vehicle Hold is actively applying the brakes .
Flashes green when the left turn signal is operating .
Both turn signal indicators flash green when the hazard warning flashers are operating .
Flashes green when the right turn signal is operating .
Both turn signal indicators flash green when the hazard warning flashers are operating .
Driving Status When Model 3 is driving ( or ready to drive ) , the touchscreen shows your current driving status and a real-time visualization of the road as detected by the Autopilot components ( see About Autopilot on page 66 ) .
The visualization automatically zooms in and out to better utilize touchscreen space and inform you when a vehicle is detected in your blind spot .
Note : The following illustration is provided for demonstration purposes only .
Depending on vehicle options , software version , and market region , the information displayed may be slightly different .
On the energy bar , black ( or white in night brightness ) represents energy being used during acceleration and green indicates energy being gained through regenerative braking .
A dashed line appears on the energy bar when power available for acceleration or power that can be gained by regenerative braking is being limited .
Here are just a few examples : • Acceleration may be limited when the Battery is reaching a low state of charge or if the powertrain is hot .
• Both acceleration and regenerative braking may be limited when the ambient temperature is either very warm or cool .
• Regenerative braking may be limited when the Battery is fully charged .
When Autosteer is available but you have n't activated it , the icon is gray .
The location of the lines correspond to the location of the detected object .
The color of the lines ( white , yellow , orange , or red ) represents the object 's proximity to Model 3 , with white being the farthest and red being very close and requiring your immediate attention .
Instead of driving distance , you can display the percentage of battery energy remaining .
Note : When anticipating when you need to charge , use range estimates as a general guideline only .
Note : In cold weather , some of the stored energy in the Battery may not be available until the Battery warms up .
When this happens , a portion of the Battery meter is blue and the driving distance value has a snowflake image next to it .
If Model 3 is plugged in , you can heat your Battery using wall power by turning on climate control using the mobile app .
When the Battery warms up , the blue portion on the meter and the snowflake image are no longer displayed .
Warning : Pay attention to important alert messages that display on the car status window .
Ignoring these messages can result in serious injury or death .
Warning : Although the touchscreen shows surrounding traffic , some vehicles may not be displayed .
Always use your mirrors and perform shoulder checks .
54 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Wipers and Washers Wipers To perform a single wipe with the windshield wipers , press and immediately release the button on the end of the left-hand steering column lever .
To adjust the continuous wiper settings , touch the windshield wiper icon located in the `` Cards '' area on the touchscreen ( see Touchscreen Overview on page 4 ) .
The wiper card displays the current state of the wipers .
Caution : Ensure the wipers are off before washing Model 3 to avoid the risk of damaging the wipers .
Periodically check and clean the edge of the wiper blades .
For details on checking and replacing wiper blades , see Wiper Blades and Washer Jets on page 148 .
Caution : Remove ice from the windshield before turning the wipers on .
Ice has sharp edges that can damage the rubber on the blades .
Caution : In harsh climates , ensure that the wiper blades are not frozen or adhered to the windshield .
Washers Fully press and hold the button on the end of the left-hand steering column lever to spray washer fluid onto the windshield .
Caution : To avoid damaging the hood , ensure that the hood is fully closed before activating the windshield wipers .
Turn the wipers on or off .
Adjust the speed of the wipers .
When wipers are set to AUTO and liquid is detected on the windshield , Model 3 determines the optimal frequency at which they should wipe .
If Model 3 does not detect liquid on the windshield , the wipers do not wipe .
If uncertain about using AUTO while in the BETA phase , Tesla recommends setting the wiper speed to one of the first four positions , as necessary .
Note : If the AUTO setting is selected but becomes unavailable , the wipers change to the manual setting ( one of the first four positions ) that is closest to the latest determined AUTO wiping frequency .
If the latest wiping frequency can not be determined , the wipers turn off .
Brakes Braking Systems Warning : Properly functioning braking systems are critical to ensure safety .
Model 3 has an anti-lock braking system ( ABS ) that prevents the wheels from locking when you apply maximum brake pressure .
This improves steering control during heavy braking in most road conditions .
During emergency braking conditions , the ABS constantly monitors the speed of each wheel and varies the brake pressure according to the grip available .
The alteration of brake pressure can be felt as a pulsing sensation through the brake pedal .
This demonstrates that the ABS is operating and is not a cause for concern .
Keep firm and steady pressure on the brake pedal while experiencing the pulsing .
The ABS indicator briefly flashes yellow on the touchscreen when you first start Model 3 .
If this indicator lights up at any other time , an ABS fault has occurred and the ABS is not operating .
The braking system remains fully operational and is not affected by an ABS failure .
If the touchscreen displays this red brake indicator at any time other than briefly when you first start Model 3 , a brake system fault is detected , or the level of the brake fluid is low .
Emergency Braking In an emergency , fully press the brake pedal and maintain firm pressure , even on low traction surfaces .
The ABS varies the braking pressure to each wheel according to the amount of traction available .
This prevents wheels from locking and ensures that you stop as safely as possible .
Doing so interrupts operation of the ABS and can increase braking distance .
Warning : Always maintain a safe distance from the vehicle in front of you and be aware of hazardous driving conditions .
While the ABS can improve stopping distance , it can not overcome the laws of physics .
It also does not prevent the danger of hydroplaning ( where a layer of water prevents direct contact between the tires and the road ) .
Automatic Emergency Braking is designed to automatically brake in situations where a collision is considered imminent ( see Automatic Emergency Braking on page 91 ) .
At best , it can minimize the impact of a frontal collision by attempting to reduce your driving speed .
Depending on Automatic Emergency Braking to avoid a collision can result in serious injury or death .
Brake Wear Model 3 brake pads are equipped with wear indicators .
A wear indicator is a thin metal strip attached to the brake pad that squeals as it rubs against the rotor when the pad wears down .
This squealing sound indicates that the brake pads have reached the end of their service life and require replacement .
Brakes must be periodically inspected visually by removing the tire and wheel .
For detailed specifications and service limits for rotors and brake pads , see Subsystems on page 162 .
Additionally , Tesla recommends cleaning and lubricating the brake calipers every year or 12,500 miles ( 20,000 km ) if in an area where roads are salted during winter months .
Warning : Neglecting to replace worn brake pads damages the braking system and can result in a braking hazard .
Regenerative Braking Whenever Model 3 is moving and your foot is off the accelerator , regenerative braking slows down Model 3 and feeds any surplus energy back to the Battery .
By anticipating your stops and reducing or removing pressure from the accelerator pedal to slow down , you can take advantage of regenerative braking to increase driving range .
Of course , this is no substitute for regular braking when needed for safety .
56 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Brakes Note : If regenerative braking is aggressively slowing Model 3 ( such as when your foot is completely off the accelerator pedal at highway speeds ) , the brake lights turn on to alert others that you are slowing down .
Note : Installing winter tires with aggressive compound and tread design may result in temporarily-reduced regenerative braking power .
However , your vehicle is designed to recalibrate itself to restore regenerative braking power after a short period of normal driving .
Warning : In snowy or icy conditions Model 3 may experience traction loss during regenerative braking , particularly when in the Standard setting and/or not using winter tires .
Tesla recommends using the Low setting ( see To Set the Regenerative Braking Level on page 57 ) in snowy or icy conditions to help maintain vehicle stability .
The amount of energy fed back to the Battery using regenerative braking can depend on the current state of the Battery and the charge level setting that you are using .
For example , regenerative braking may be limited if the Battery is already fully charged or if the ambient temperature is too cold .
To Set the Regenerative Braking Level You can use the touchscreen to change the level of regenerative braking : 1 .
When you release the accelerator , Model 3 slows down , reducing the need to use the brakes .
When you release the accelerator , Model 3 takes longer to slow down and coasts further than if set to Standard .
Parking Brake The parking brake automatically engages when you shift Model 3 into Park , and releases when you shift into any other gear .
Note : The parking brake operates on the rear wheels only , and is independent of the pedal- operated brake system .
Warning : In snowy or icy conditions the rear wheels may not have sufficient traction to prevent Model 3 from sliding down a slope , particularly if not using winter tires .
Avoid parking on hills in snowy or icy conditions .
You are always responsible for parking safely .
Warning : Your Model 3 may display an alert if the road is too steep to safely park on , or if the parking brakes are not properly engaged .
These alerts are for guidance purposes only and are not a substitute for the driver ’ s judgment of safe parking conditions , including specific road or weather conditions .
Do not depend on these alerts to determine whether or not it is safe to park at any location .
You are always responsible for parking safely .
When you use the touchscreen to manually apply the parking brake , the red parking brake indicator lights up on the touchscreen .
If the parking brake experiences an electrical issue , the amber parking brake indicator lights up and a fault message displays at the top of the touchscreen .
Caution : In the unlikely event that Model 3 loses electrical power , you can not access the touchscreen and are therefore unable to release the parking brake without first jump starting Model 3 ( see Instructions for Transporters on page 173 ) .
Driving 57 Traction Control How It Works The traction control system constantly monitors the speed of the front and rear wheels .
If Model 3 experiences a loss of traction , the system minimizes wheel spin by controlling brake pressure and motor power .
Under normal conditions , it should remain on to ensure maximum safety .
This yellow indicator flashes on the touchscreen whenever the traction control system is actively controlling brake pressure and motor power to minimize wheel spin .
If the indicator stays on , a fault is detected with the traction control system .
Warning : If the above indicator remains illuminated in situations in which you have not enabled Slip Start ( described next ) , the traction control system may not be operating correctly .
Warning : Traction control can not prevent collisions caused by driving dangerously or turning too sharply at high speeds .
Allowing Wheel Slip To allow the wheels to spin at a limited speed , you can enable Slip Start .
Slip Start can be enabled at any speed , however it is less effective at higher speeds .
Under normal conditions , Slip Start should not be enabled .
Enable it only in circumstances where you deliberately want the wheels to spin , such as : • Starting on a loose surface , such as gravel or snow .
The touchscreen displays an alert message when Slip Start is enabled .
Although Slip Start is automatically disabled the next time you start Model 3 , it is strongly recommended that you disable it immediately after the circumstances that required you to enable it have passed .
Note : Slip Start can not be enabled when you are actively using Traffic-Aware Cruise Control .
58 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Park Assist How Park Assist Works Model 3 has several sensors designed to detect the presence of objects .
When driving slowly in Drive or Reverse ( for example , when parking ) , the sensors alert you if an object is detected in close proximity of your Model 3 .
Objects are only detected in the direction of the gear you selected ; front objects in Drive , rear objects in Reverse .
Warning : You may not be alerted if Model 3 rolls freely in the opposite direction of the gear you selected ( for example , you will not receive an alert if Model 3 rolls backwards down a hill while in Drive ) .
Warning : Never depend on Park Assist to inform you if an area you are approaching is free of objects and/or people .
Several external factors can reduce the performance of Park Assist , causing either no readings or false readings ( see Limitations and False Warnings on page 60 ) .
Therefore , depending on Park Assist to determine if Model 3 is approaching an obstruction can result in damage to the vehicle and/or objects , and can potentially cause serious injury .
Always inspect the area with your own eyes .
When reversing , perform shoulder checks and use all mirrors .
Park assist does not detect children , pedestrians , bicyclists , animals , or objects that are moving , protruding , located too far above or below the sensors , or too close or too far from the sensors .
Park Assist is for guidance purposes only and is not intended to replace your own direct visual checks .
Visual and Audio Feedback When you shift to Reverse , the Park Assist view displays on the touchscreen , showing objects that are in close proximity to the front and rear of Model 3 .
This view closes when you shift into Drive unless an object is detected close to the front of Model 3 , in which case the Park Assist view closes automatically when your driving speed exceeds 5 mph ( 8 km/h ) .
You can manually close the park assist view on the touchscreen by touching the X in the upper left corner .
When driving with the Camera app displayed on the touchscreen , you can switch to the Park Assist view when driving at speeds below 5 mph ( 8 km/h ) .
Touch the button located in the upper left corner of the Camera app window .
This is useful if you need assistance with parallel parking .
If chimes are turned on ( see Controlling Audible Feedback on page 60 ) , an audible beep sounds as you approach an object .
You can temporarily mute the chime by pressing the scroll button on the left side of the steering wheel or by touching the mute button on the bottom left corner of the Park Assist view .
Avoid using a high pressure power washer on the sensors and do not clean a sensor with a sharp or abrasive object that can scratch or damage its surface .
Caution : Do not install accessories or stickers on or near the parking sensors .
Controlling Audible Feedback You can use Park Assist with or without audible feedback .
To mute the chimes temporarily , press the scroll button on the left side of the steering wheel or touch the mute button in the corner of the Park Assist view .
Limitations and False Warnings The parking sensors may not function correctly in these situations : • One or more of the parking sensors is damaged , dirty , or covered ( such as mud , ice , or snow ) .
Caution : Shorter objects that are detected ( such as curbs or low barriers ) can move into the blind spot of the sensors .
Model 3 can not alert you about an object while it is in the blind spot of the sensors .
• The sensors are affected by other electrical equipment or devices that generate ultrasonic waves .
• You are driving in a location where the sensors ' ultrasonic waves are deflected away from the vehicle ( such as driving next to a wall or pillar ) .
• The object is located too close to the bumper .
• Model 3 rolls freely in the opposite direction of the gear you selected ( for example , you will not receive an alert if Model 3 rolls backwards down a hill while in Drive ) .
Other Parking Aids In addition to Park Assist , when shifted into Reverse , the backup camera displays a view of the area behind Model 3 ( see Rear View Camera on page 64 ) .
60 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Vehicle Hold When Model 3 is stopped , Vehicle Hold can continue to apply the brakes even after you remove your foot from the brake pedal .
After coming to a complete stop , simply press the brake pedal again ( until the touchscreen displays the Vehicle Hold indicator light ) to enable Vehicle Hold .
You can then release the brake pedal and remain stopped , even on a hill .
This indicator displays on the touchscreen whenever Vehicle Hold is actively braking Model 3 .
To disengage Vehicle Hold , press the accelerator pedal or press and release the brake pedal .
Model 3 also shifts into Park if it detects that the driver has left the vehicle .
Driving 61 Track Mode Track Mode , available only on Performance Model 3 vehicles , modifies the vehicle 's stability control , traction control , regenerative braking , and cooling system to increase performance and handling while driving on closed circuit courses .
Track Mode improves cornering ability by intelligently using the vehicle 's motors , and regenerative and traditional braking systems .
When enabled , the cooling system runs at an increased level during and after aggressive driving sessions to allow your vehicle ’ s systems to withstand the surplus heat .
Track Mode is always disabled when you start Model 3 .
When enabled , TRACK displays on the touchscreen above the driving speed .
You can disable Track Mode at any time by turning the setting off on the touchscreen .
Track Mode remains on even after you exit your vehicle to quickly cool powertrain systems between driving sessions .
Track Mode automatically turns off when the vehicle is sufficiently cooled or if the vehicle is powered off and you power it back on again .
Warning : Track Mode is designed for use on closed circuit driving courses only .
It is the driver ’ s responsibility to drive safely and ensure that they do not endanger others .
Warning : Track Mode is designed to be used by experienced track drivers familiar with the course .
Do not use on public roads .
It is the driver ’ s responsibility to be in control of the vehicle at all times , including on the race track .
Because vehicle behavior ( including Traction and Stability Control behavior ) differs from typical use , drivers should use caution when using Track Mode .
Note : Track Mode was designed and calibrated for Performance Model 3 with the Performance Upgrade Package .
Vehicles without performance brakes and tires may experience comparatively lower performance and endurance .
Note : Some settings , such as Slip Start and Regenerative Braking , are overridden and can not be changed until Track Mode is disabled .
When Track Mode is disabled , the settings return to their previous state .
62 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Getting Maximum Range Driving 63 Driving Tips to Maximize Range You can maximize your driving range using the same driving habits that you use to conserve fuel in a gasoline-powered vehicle .
In addition to driving habits , energy consumption depends on environmental conditions ( such as exceptionally cold or hot weather and driving on roads with steep hills ) .
To get the maximum range from a charge : • Slow down your driving and avoid frequent and rapid acceleration .
• If safe to do so , modulate the accelerator pedal instead of using the brake pedal when gradually slowing down .
Whenever Model 3 is moving and you are not pressing the accelerator pedal , regenerative braking slows down Model 3 and feeds surplus energy back to the Battery ( see Regenerative Braking on page 56 ) .
Using seat heaters to keep warm is more efficient than heating the cabin .
The power meter on the touchscreen and the Energy app provides feedback on energy usage .
With this feedback , you can become familiar with how driving habits and environmental conditions impact how much energy Model 3 is using .
Energy App Use the Energy app to view real-time and projected energy usage .
Choose from two types of charts : • Trip : monitor the amount of energy being used while navigating to a destination .
You can track actual usage against the initial prediction .
The green line represents the actual usage whereas the gray line represents predicted usage .
To change the zoom level , touch the zoom icon located in the top right corner of the chart .
Note : The Trip chart displays energy usage only if you are currently navigating to a destination .
Range Assurance Model 3 helps protect you against running out of energy .
Model 3 continuously monitors its energy level and proximity to known charging locations .
Touch the map 's charging icon to toggle between displaying superchargers only , and displaying all chargers , including destination chargers , and visited chargers .
When you are at risk of driving beyond the range of known charging locations , the touchscreen displays a message giving you the opportunity to display a list of charging locations that are within range .
When you select a charging location from the list , Model 3 provides navigation instructions and the turn-by-turn direction list displays the predicted amount of energy that will remain when you arrive at the charging destination .
Touch Instant Range or Average Range to adjust the projected range estimation .
Rear View Camera Camera Location Model 3 is equipped with a rear view camera located above the rear license plate .
inspect the area with your own eyes .
When reversing , perform shoulder checks and use all mirrors .
Use the camera for guidance purposes only .
It is not intended to replace your own direct visual checks and is not a substitute for careful driving .
Cleaning the Camera To ensure a clear picture , keep the camera lens clean , and free of obstructions .
Remove any buildup of dirt by occasionally wiping the camera lens with a soft damp cloth .
Doing so can damage the surface of the camera lens .
Whenever you shift into Reverse , the touchscreen displays the view from the camera .
Lines show your driving path based on the position of the steering wheel .
These lines adjust appropriately as you move the steering wheel .
To display the view from the camera at any time : Touch the camera icon on the `` Cards '' area on the touchscreen .
Open the app launcher then touch the camera icon .
Warning : Never depend on the rear view camera to inform you if the area behind you is free of objects and/or people when reversing .
The camera may not detect objects or barriers that can potentially cause damage or injury .
In addition , several external factors can reduce the performance of the camera , including a dirty or obstructed lens .
Therefore , depending on the rear view camera to determine if Model 3 is approaching an obstruction can result in damage to the vehicle and/or objects , and can potentially cause serious injury .
In addition to supporting Autopilot features , cameras can record and store video footage on a USB flash drive .
Note : You are responsible for complying with all local laws , regulations , and property restrictions regarding video recordings when using dashcam .
Dashcam is external only and does not record audio .
Dashcam does not record video when your vehicle is powered off .
This folder is required for Model 3 to know where to store the video files ; dashcam does not work without it .
After adding the required folder to your supported flash drive , insert it into one of your vehicle 's front USB ports ( see Interior Storage and Electronics on page 20 ) .
The rear USB ports are meant for charging mobile devices and do not support dashcam .
When Model 3 recognizes the flash drive , which may take approximately 15 seconds , a dashcam icon appears in the status bar at the top of your touchscreen and dashcam automatically begins recording .
Tap the dashcam icon , when dashcam is paused , to start recording video on the flash drive .
The dashcam temporarily stores approximately one hour of the most recent video footage on the flash drive before new video begins overwriting old video .
Ensure that the dashcam is paused before removing the flash drive to avoid losing camera footage .
Tap the dashcam icon , when recording , to archive the most recent ten minutes of video .
The video files are saved on the flash drive with a unique timestamp .
These saved video recordings are not overwritten by new recordings .
To access the video footage from dashcam , pause the dashcam , then remove the flash drive and use a personal computer to access the video files located in the “ TeslaCam ” folder .
Caution : You may lose up to the last 60 seconds of camera footage if you remove the flash drive before pausing dashcam or if your vehicle loses 12V power .
The flash drive can not also be used to play media files , and Tesla is not responsible for any personal files becoming lost or corrupted .
Note : Tesla recommends using a flash drive with as much available storage as possible ; saving the most recent ten-minutes of video requires approximately 1 GB , and the hour- long video footage loop requires approximately 8 GB of free space .
If your flash drive does not have sufficient storage , an `` X '' displays on the dashcam icon and dashcam may be unable to save video files .
Note : Refer to About Autopilot on page 66 for information on limitations of the cameras and how to clean it .
For best results , ensure that both the cameras and the windshield have good visibility .
Driving 65 About Autopilot How It Works Your Model 3 includes the following Autopilot components that actively monitor the surrounding roadway : 1 .
Ultrasonic sensors are located in the front and rear bumpers .
Three cameras are mounted to the windshield above the rear view mirror .
Radar is mounted behind the front bumper on the right side of the vehicle .
These Autopilot convenience features are designed to reduce driver workload : Note : Depending on options purchased , software version , and market region , your vehicle may not be equipped with all Autopilot convenience features .
Calibration Model 3 must maneuver with a great deal of precision when Autopilot features are being used .
When calibration is complete , the features are available for use .
Note : If you attempt to use a feature that is not available until the calibration process is complete , the feature will not be enabled and the touchscreen displays a message .
Note : Model 3 repeats the calibration process if the cameras are serviced by Tesla and in some cases , after a software update .
Limitations Many factors can impact the performance of Autopilot components , causing them to be unable to function as intended .
Warning : The list above does not represent an exhaustive list of situations that may interfere with proper operation of Autopilot components .
Never depend on these components to keep you safe .
It is the driver 's responsibility to stay alert , drive safely , and be in control of the vehicle at all times .
Failure to do so can cause one or more Autopilot features to malfunction .
Cleaning Cameras and Sensors To ensure the various Autopilot components can provide information that is as accurate as possible , keep them clean and free of obstructions or damage .
Occasionally remove any buildup of dirt by wiping the components with a soft cloth dampened with warm water .
Caution : Do not clean an ultrasonic sensor or camera lens with a sharp or abrasive object that can scratch or damage its surface .
Note : If your vehicle is not equipped with an optional Autopilot package , refer to the owner 's manual on your vehicle 's touchscreen for instructions on how to use Cruise Control .
Traffic-Aware Cruise Control ( if equipped ) uses the forward looking cameras and the radar sensor to determine when there is a vehicle in front of you in the same lane .
When a vehicle is detected , Traffic-Aware Cruise Control is designed to slow down Model 3 as needed to maintain a selected time-based distance from the vehicle in front , up to the set speed .
Traffic-Aware Cruise Control does not eliminate the need to watch the road in front of you and to manually apply the brakes when needed .
Traffic-Aware Cruise Control is primarily intended for driving on dry , straight roads , such as highways and freeways .
It should not be used on city streets .
Warning : Traffic-Aware Cruise Control is designed for your driving comfort and convenience and is not a collision warning or avoidance system .
It is your responsibility to stay alert , drive safely , and be in control of the vehicle at all times .
Always watch the road in front of you and be prepared to take corrective action at all times .
Failure to do so can result in serious injury or death .
Warning : Although Traffic-Aware Cruise Control is capable of detecting pedestrians and cyclists , never depend on Traffic-Aware Cruise Control to adequately slow Model 3 down for them .
Always watch the road in front of you and be prepared to take corrective action at all times .
Failure to do so can result in serious injury or death .
Warning : Do not use Traffic-Aware Cruise Control on city streets or on roads where traffic conditions are constantly changing .
Traffic- Aware Cruise Control does not adapt driving speed based on road and driving conditions .
When Traffic-Aware Cruise Control is available but is not actively cruising at a specified set speed , the touchscreen displays a gray speedometer icon below your current driving speed .
The number shown in gray is your current driving speed , or the speed limit that is being determined by Speed Assist ( see Controlling Speed Assist on page 93 ) , whichever is greater .
If you engage Traffic-Aware Cruise Control , this is the cruising speed that will be set .
Set the Cruising Speed To set the cruising speed , move the cruise control lever fully down once then release .
This sets the cruising speed to the detected speed limit ( plus any offset you 've specified using Speed Assist as described in Controlling Speed Assist on page 93 ) or your current driving speed , whichever is greater .
Autopilot 69 Release the accelerator pedal to allow Traffic- Aware Cruise Control to maintain your cruising speed .
Traffic-Aware Cruise Control When the cruising speed is set , the speedometer icon on the touchscreen turns blue and displays the set cruising speed .
Note : Moving the gear level fully down twice in quick succession engages Autosteer ( assuming it has been enabled as described in Autosteer on page 75 ) and the set speed changes to either your current driving speed , or the current set speed ( displayed in the icon ) , whichever is greater .
It is the driver 's responsibility to cruise at a safe speed based on road conditions and speed limits .
Warning : When cruising at the speed limit , the cruising speed does not change when the speed limit changes .
If your driving speed is at or below the new speed limit , move the lever up to cancel Traffic-Aware Cruise Control , then move it back down again to re-initiate and cruise at the new speed limit .
You can also manually adjust your cruising speed ( see Changing the Set Speed on page 71 ) .
Warning : Do not rely on Traffic-Aware Cruise Control or Speed Assist to determine an accurate or appropriate cruising speed .
Always cruise at a safe speed based on road conditions and applicable speed limits .
Cruising at the Set Speed Traffic-Aware Cruise Control maintains your set cruising speed whenever a vehicle is not detected in front of Model 3 .
Traffic-Aware Cruise Control also adjusts the cruising speed when entering and exiting curves .
You can manually accelerate at any time when cruising at a set speed , but when you release the accelerator , Traffic-Aware Cruise Control resumes cruising at the set speed .
Note : When Traffic-Aware Cruise Control is actively slowing down Model 3 to maintain the selected distance from the vehicle ahead , brake lights turn on to alert other road users that you are slowing down .
You may notice slight movement of the brake pedal .
Warning : Traffic-Aware Cruise Control may occasionally cause Model 3 to brake when not required or when you are not expecting it .
Warning : Due to limitations inherent in the onboard GPS ( Global Positioning System ) , you may experience situations in which Traffic-Aware Cruise Control slows down the vehicle , especially near highway exits where a curve is detected and/or you are actively navigating to a destination and not following the route .
Warning : Traffic-Aware Cruise Control can not detect all objects and , especially in situations when you are driving over 50 mph ( 80 km/h ) , may not brake/ decelerate when a vehicle or object is only partially in the driving lane or when a vehicle you are following moves out of your driving path and a stationary or slow-moving vehicle or object is in front of you .
Always pay attention to the road ahead and stay prepared to take immediate corrective action .
Depending on Traffic-Aware Cruise Control to avoid a collision can result in serious injury or death .
In addition , Traffic-Aware Cruise Control may react to vehicles or objects that either do not exist or are not in the lane of travel , causing Model 3 to slow down unnecessarily or inappropriately .
Warning : Traffic-Aware Cruise Control may be unable to provide adequate speed control because of limited braking capability and hills .
It can also misjudge the distance from a vehicle ahead .
Never depend on Traffic-Aware Cruise Control to slow down the vehicle enough to prevent a collision .
Always keep your eyes on the road when driving and be prepared to take corrective action as needed .
Depending on Traffic-Aware Cruise Control to slow the vehicle down enough to prevent a collision can result in serious injury or death .
70 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Traffic-Aware Cruise Control Changing the Set Speed To change the set speed while using Traffic- Aware Cruise Control , roll the right scroll wheel up ( to increase ) or down ( to decrease ) the set speed until your desired set speed is displayed .
When the vehicle is moving again , Traffic-Aware Cruise Control resumes operating at the set speed .
However , under the following circumstances , Traffic-Aware Cruise Control goes into a HOLD state , in which case , you need to briefly press the accelerator pedal to resume cruising .
When the HOLD status is active , the touchscreen displays the HOLD icon and a message that indicates that you need to resume cruise control .
Cruising Near or On Freeway Exits When cruising near an exit on a controlled access road ( such as a highway or freeway ) and engaging the turn signal toward the exit , Traffic-Aware Cruise Control assumes you are exiting and begins to slow down the vehicle .
If you do not drive onto the exit , Traffic-Aware Cruise Control resumes cruising at the set speed .
In a region with right hand traffic , this occurs only when you engage the right turn signal when driving in the right-most lane within 164 feet ( 50 meters ) of an exit .
Likewise in regions with left hand traffic ; when engaging the left turn signal when driving in the left-most lane within 164 feet ( 50 meters ) of an exit .
Note : The onboard Global Positioning System ( GPS ) determines if you are driving in a region with right or left hand traffic .
In situations where GPS data is unavailable ( for example , if there is inadequate signal ) , engaging the turn signal near an exit does not cause Traffic- Aware Cruise Control to slow down Model 3 .
Note : It may take a few seconds for Model 3 to reach the new cruising speed , assuming Model 3 does not detect a vehicle ahead driving slower than your set speed .
The new set speed is maintained for the duration of the interchange or off-ramp ( unless you override it or cancel Traffic-Aware Cruise Control ) .
After the interchange or off-ramp , the set speed may revert or change as necessary based on the new location .
For example , if you merged onto a different highway , the set speed reverts back to the set speed that was in use before driving on the interchange .
Do not rely on Traffic-Aware Cruise Control to determine an appropriate driving speed .
Tesla recommends driving at a speed that is safe for road conditions and within posted speed limits .
Adjust the Following Distance To adjust the following distance you want to maintain between Model 3 and a vehicle traveling ahead of you , press the steering wheel 's right scroll button to the left or right to choose a setting from 1 ( the closest following distance ) to 7 ( the longest following distance ) .
Each setting corresponds to a time- based distance that represents how long it takes for Model 3 , from its current location , to reach the location of the rear bumper of the vehicle ahead of you .
You can also display and adjust the setting for the following distance on the touchscreen at any time , even when Traffic-Aware Cruise Control is not active .
As you adjust the following distance , the touchscreen displays the current setting .
Note : Your setting is retained until you manually change it .
Warning : It is the driver 's responsibility to determine and maintain a safe following distance at all times .
Do not rely on Traffic-Aware Cruise Control to maintain an accurate or appropriate following distance .
Always watch the road in front of you and stay prepared to take immediate corrective action .
By momentarily holding the turn signal lever up or down , you can quickly accelerate up to your set speed without having to press the accelerator pedal .
The turn signal causes acceleration only when all of the following conditions are met : • Traffic-Aware Cruise Control is operating and detects a vehicle in front of you .
• No obstacles or vehicles are detected in the target lane .
Overtake Acceleration is intended as an aid when passing a vehicle ahead of you .
When the turn signal is engaged , Traffic-Aware Cruise Control continues to maintain distance from the vehicle ahead , but allows you to drive slightly closer than your selected distance .
Acceleration cancels when one of the conditions happen : • You reach your set cruising speed .
Note : Overtake Acceleration occurs when you hold the turn signal in the momentary position ( partially engaged ) .
When you release the turn signal , Model 3 stops accelerating ( in the same way as when you release the accelerator pedal ) and resumes the set speed .
Warning : Overtake Acceleration can cancel for many unforeseen reasons in addition to those listed above ( for example , lack of GPS data ) .
Stay alert and never depend on Overtake Acceleration to increase your driving speed .
Warning : Overtake Acceleration increases your driving speed whenever the appropriate turn signal is engaged , and accelerates Model 3 closer to the vehicle ahead .
Although Traffic-Aware Cruise Control continues to maintain distance from the vehicle ahead , it is important to be aware that your selected following distance is reduced when Overtake Acceleration is active , particularly in cases where it may not be your intention to overtake the vehicle you are following .
Canceling and Resuming To manually cancel Traffic-Aware Cruise Control , move the gear lever up and release or press the brake pedal .
The speedometer icon on the touchscreen turns gray to indicate that Traffic-Aware Cruise Control is no longer active .
Warning : Do not hold the gear lever up for more than one second .
To re-enable cruising at the current driving speed , move the gear lever fully down once then release .
Instead , regenerative braking slows down Model 3 in the same way as when you move your foot off the accelerator when driving without Traffic- Aware Cruise Control ( see Regenerative Braking on page 56 ) .
• The traction control setting is manually disabled or is repeatedly engaging to prevent wheels from slipping .
When Traffic-Aware Cruise Control is unavailable or cancels , Model 3 no longer drives consistently at a set speed and no longer maintains a specified distance from the vehicle ahead .
Warning : Traffic-Aware Cruise Control can cancel unexpectedly at any time for unforeseen reasons .
Always watch the road in front of you and stay prepared to take appropriate action .
It is the driver 's responsibility to be in control of Model 3 at all times .
Summary of Cruise Indicators Traffic-Aware Cruise Control is available but is not actively controlling your speed until you activate it .
The number shown in gray is determined by Speed Assist ( see Controlling Speed Assist on page 93 ) .
Traffic-Aware Cruise Control is operating and is either maintaining the set speed ( no vehicle in front ) or is maintaining a chosen following distance from a vehicle ahead ( up to the set speed ) .
If safe , press the accelerator pedal to resume cruising at the set speed .
Warning : The list above does not represent an exhaustive list of situations that may interfere with proper operation of Traffic-Aware Cruise Control .
Autosteer also allows you to use the turn signals to move Model 3 into an adjacent lane ( see Auto Lane Change on page 77 ) .
You must keep your hands on the steering wheel at all times .
Warning : Autosteer is intended for use only on highways and limited-access roads with a fully attentive driver .
When using Autosteer , hold the steering wheel and be mindful of road conditions and surrounding traffic .
Do not use Autosteer on city streets , in construction zones , or in areas where bicyclists or pedestrians may be present .
Never depend on Autosteer to determine an appropriate driving path .
Always be prepared to take immediate action .
Failure to follow these instructions could cause damage , serious injury or death .
To initiate Autosteer , move the gear lever fully down twice in quick succession .
Autosteer briefly displays a message on the touchscreen reminding you to pay attention to the road and be ready to take over at any time .
To indicate that Autosteer is now actively steering Model 3 , the touchscreen displays the Autosteer icon in blue .
When Autosteer is able to detect lane markings , it also displays the driving lane in blue .
Autopilot 75 Autosteer The touchscreen displays a message indicating that Autosteer is temporarily unavailable if you attempted to engage Autosteer when driving at a speed that is not within the speed required for Autosteer to operate .
Autosteer may also be unavailable if it is not receiving adequate data from the camera ( s ) or sensors .
If Autosteer is unable to detect lane markings , the driving lane is determined based on the vehicle you are following .
In most cases , Autosteer attempts to center Model 3 in the driving lane .
However , if the sensors detect the presence of an obstacle ( such as a vehicle or guard rail ) , Autosteer may steer Model 3 in a driving path that is offset from the center of the lane .
Warning : Autosteer is not designed to , and will not , steer Model 3 around objects partially or completely in the driving lane .
Always watch the road in front of you and stay prepared to take appropriate action .
It is the driver 's responsibility to be in control of Model 3 at all times .
Restricted Speed Autosteer is intended for use only by a fully attentive driver on freeways and highways where access is limited by entry and exit ramps .
If you choose to use Autosteer on residential roads , a road without a center divider , or a road where access is not limited , Autosteer may limit the maximum allowed cruising speed .
The maximum allowed cruising speed on such roads is calculated based on the detected speed limit including a Speed Assist offset of up to +5 mph ( 10 km/h ) .
However , you can select a more restrictive cruising speed by reducing the speed limit offset ( see Controlling Speed Assist on page 93 ) or by changing the set speed ( see Changing the Set Speed on page 71 ) .
In situations where the speed limit can not be detected when Autosteer is engaged , Autosteer reduces your driving speed and limits the set speed to 45 mph ( 70 km/h ) .
Although you can manually accelerate to exceed the limited speed , Model 3 may not brake for detected obstacles .
Autosteer will slow down to the limited speed when you release the accelerator pedal .
When you leave the road , or disengage Autosteer by using the steering wheel , you can increase your set speed again , if desired .
When active , Autosteer requires you to hold the steering wheel .
If it does not detect your hands on the steering wheel for a period of time , a flashing blue light appears at the top of the car status section of the touchscreen and the following message displays : Autosteer detects your hands by recognizing light resistance as the steering wheel turns , or from you manually turning the steering wheel very lightly ( without enough force to retake control ) .
Autosteer also qualifies your hands as being detected if you engage a turn signal or use a button or scroll wheel on the steering wheel .
Note : When your hands are detected , the message disappears and Autosteer resumes normal operation .
Note : Autosteer may also sound a chime at the same time that the message is initially displayed .
Autosteer requires that you pay attention to your surroundings and remain prepared to take control at any time .
If Autosteer still does not detect your hands on the steering wheel , the request escalates by sounding chimes that increase in frequency .
If you repeatedly ignore Autosteer 's prompts for having your hands on the steering wheel , Autosteer disables for the rest of the drive and displays the following message .
For the rest of the drive , you must steer manually .
Autosteer is available again on your next drive ( after you stop and shift Model 3 into Park ) .
Take Over Immediately In situations where Autosteer is unable to steer Model 3 , Autosteer sounds a warning chime and displays the following message on the touchscreen : 76 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Autosteer When you see this message , TAKE OVER STEERING IMMEDIATELY .
When Autosteer cancels , it sounds chimes and the Autosteer icon either turns gray to indicate that Autosteer is no longer active , or disappears to indicate that it is not currently available .
Disengage Traffic- Aware Cruise Control as you normally would , by moving the gear lever upward or pressing the brake pedal .
Note : If you move the gear lever upward and hold it up for more than one second , Model 3 shifts into Neutral after canceling Autosteer .
Auto Lane Change When Autosteer is active on a vehicle equipped with Auto Lane Change , you can use the turn signals to move Model 3 into an adjacent lane without moving the steering wheel ( which would cancel Autosteer ) .
Warning : It is the driver 's responsibility to determine whether a lane change is safe and appropriate .
Therefore , before initiating a lane change , always check blind spots , lane markings , and the surrounding roadway to confirm it is safe and appropriate to move into the target lane .
Warning : Never depend on Auto Lane Change to determine an appropriate driving path .
Drive attentively by watching the road and traffic ahead of you , checking the surrounding area , and monitoring the touchscreen for warnings .
Always be prepared to take immediate action .
Warning : Do not use Auto Lane Change on city streets or on roads where traffic conditions are constantly changing and where bicycles and pedestrians are present .
Warning : The performance of Auto Lane Change depends on the ability of the camera ( s ) to recognize lane markings .
Warning : Failure to follow all warnings and instructions can result in property damage , serious injury or death .
Operating Auto Lane Change Auto Lane Change is available whenever Autosteer is active .
Perform visual checks to make sure it is safe and appropriate to move into the target lane 2 .
Disengage the turn signal after you are in the target lane .
Auto Lane Change moves Model 3 into the adjacent lane in the direction indicated by the turn signal , provided the following conditions are met : • The turn signal is engaged .
• The ultrasonic sensors and Autopilot cameras do not detect a vehicle or obstacle up to the center of the target lane .
• Your vehicle does not detect another vehicle in its blind spot .
• Midway through the lane change , Auto Lane Change can detect the outside lane marking of the target lane .
Midway through the lane change , Auto Lane Change must detect the target lane 's outside lane marking .
If this lane marking can not be detected , the lane change is aborted and Model 3 returns to its original driving lane .
Moving into an additional lane requires you to engage the turn signal a second time after the first lane change is complete .
When using Auto Lane Change , it is important to monitor its performance by watching the driving path in front of you and the surrounding area .
Stay prepared to take over steering at any time .
As you are crossing over into the adjacent lane , the touchscreen displays the lane marking as a dashed blue line .
Once in your new lane , lane markings are displayed as solid blue lines again .
In situations where Auto Lane Change is unable to operate at optimal performance , or can not operate due to inadequate data , the touchscreen displays a series of warnings .
Therefore , when using Auto Lane Change , always pay attention to the touchscreen and be prepared to manually steer Model 3 .
Stop Light Warning ( U.S. only ) While Autosteer or Navigate on Autopilot is in use , Model 3 displays a warning on the touchscreen and sounds a chime if it detects that you are likely to run through a red stop light .
The visual and audible warnings cancel after a few seconds , or when you press the brake pedal , whichever comes first .
Warning : Stop Light Warning does not apply the brakes or decelerate Model 3 , does not detect stop signs , and may not detect all stop lights .
Stop Light Warning is designed for guidance purposes only and is not a substitute for attentive driving and sound judgment .
Keep your eyes on the road when driving and never depend on Stop Light Warning to warn you of a stop light .
Warning : Stop Light Warning is designed to only warn you when approaching a solid red or later portion of a yellow traffic light ; it may not issue warnings at intersections with flashing lights .
Additionally , Stop Light Warning does not warn you of an approaching stop light if you are pressing the accelerator pedal or brake pedal ( which disables Autosteer ) .
Along the highway portion of a navigation route , Navigate on Autopilot also changes lanes to prepare for exits and to minimize the driving time to your destination .
Warning : Navigate on Autopilot does not make driving autonomous .
You must pay attention to the road , keep your hands on the steering wheel at all times , and remain aware of your navigation route .
Warning : As is the case with normal driving , be extra careful around blind corners , highway interchanges , and exits because obstacles can appear quickly and at any time .
Remain alert at all times and be prepared to take immediate action .
Failure to do so can cause damage , injury or death .
Then , to customize how you want Navigate on Autopilot to operate , touch CUSTOMIZE NAVIGATE ON AUTOPILOT : • Enable At Start Of Every Trip : Choose whether or not you want to automatically enable Navigate on Autopilot for every navigation route .
When enabled , the Navigate on Autopilot button on the turn- by-turn direction list is already enabled at the start of every trip .
Route-based lane changes are designed to keep you on your navigation route ( for example , moving you into an adjacent lane to prepare for an upcoming off-ramp ) whereas speed-based lane changes are designed to maintain a driving speed ( not to exceed your cruising speed ) that allows you to minimize the time it takes to reach your destination ( for example , moving into an adjacent lane to pass a vehicle in front of you ) .
You can use this setting to disable speed-based lane changes or to specify how aggressively you want Navigate on Autopilot to change lanes to achieve the set cruising speed .
The MILD setting is more conservative about lane changes and may result in a slightly longer driving time whereas MAD MAX is designed to allow you to reach your destination in the shortest driving time possible , but will only change lanes when safe to do so .
However , if you want Navigate on Autopilot to change lanes without requiring this confirmation , turn this setting off .
When you turn the setting off , you can specify if or how you want to be notified of lane changes ( Off , Chime , Vibrate , or Both ) .
Warning : If you turn off Require Lane Change Confirmation , Navigate on Autopilot notifies you of upcoming lane changes and off-ramps , but it remains your responsibility to monitor the environment and maintain control of Model 3 at all times .
Lane changes can occur quickly and suddenly .
Always keep your hands on the wheel and your eyes on the driving path in front of you .
Note : In addition to route-based and speed- based lane changes , Navigate on Autopilot also requests a lane change to the right as a reminder to stay out of the left-most lane when you are not passing other vehicles .
Note : The touchscreen displays route-based lane changes at the top of the map 's turn-by- turn direction list to notify you that an upcoming lane change is needed to stay on the navigation route .
Operating Navigate on Autopilot Once enabled , the Navigate on Autopilot button appears on the map ’ s turn-by-turn direction list whenever a navigation route is active and the route includes at least one controlled-access road .
Touch this button to allow Navigate on Autopilot to assist you on your journey .
When enabled , the Navigate on Autopilot button is blue and the turn-by-turn direction displays the Autosteer icon next to maneuvers ( such as freeway exits ) that Navigate on Autopilot will handle .
Navigate on Autopilot activates and deactivates as appropriate , based on the type of road you are driving on .
For example , if Autosteer is active and the Navigate on Autopilot setting is turned on , Navigate on Autopilot automatically becomes active when you reach a supported controlled-access portion of your navigation route .
Whenever Navigate on Autopilot is active , the touchscreen displays the driving lane as a single blue line in front of Model 3 : When Navigate on Autopilot is active and you approach an off-ramp or freeway interchange along your navigation route , the appropriate turn signal engages and Autosteer maneuvers Model 3 onto the off-ramp or interchange .
Warning : Never depend on Navigate on Autopilot to determine an appropriate lane at an off-ramp .
Stay alert and perform visual checks to ensure that the driving lane is safe and appropriate .
Autopilot 79 Autosteer When you leave a controlled-access road ( for example , you exit a freeway or you enter a section of the navigation route that is no longer supported ) , Navigate on Autopilot reverts back to Autosteer— a unique triple- tone chime sounds and the touchscreen displays the driving lane lines in blue ( instead of the single blue in front of Model 3 ) .
When you exit onto an off-ramp , the touchscreen briefly displays a countdown message warning you of the distance remaining before Navigate on Autopilot reverts back to Autosteer .
Note : The way Navigate on Autopilot determines navigation routes and maneuvers at freeway interchanges can be impacted by whether or not the navigation system is set up to use High Occupancy Vehicle ( HOV ) lanes .
Therefore , ensure the Use HOV Lanes setting is appropriate for your circumstances ( see Maps and Navigation on page 108 ) .
If the setting is off , Navigate on Autopilot never uses an HOV lane , regardless of time of day .
If the setting is on , Navigate on Autopilot will always include the use of the HOV lane , whenever it exists .
Always be prepared to take appropriate actions such as stopping at red lights and stop signs , and yielding to other road users .
Warning : Navigate on Autopilot may not always attempt to exit at an off-ramp , even when the exit is determined by the navigation route .
Always remain alert and be prepared to manually steer onto the off-ramp , or make a required lane change .
You can cancel Navigate on Autopilot at any time by touching the Navigate on Autopilot button on the map ’ s turn-by-turn direction list ( your vehicle reverts back to Autosteer ) , or by canceling Autosteer entirely ( see Canceling Autosteer on page 77 ) .
Lane Changes Navigate on Autopilot changes lanes to either prepare Model 3 for an upcoming off-ramp , to increase your driving speed ( not to exceed your set cruising speed ) , or to move Model 3 out of a left-most lane when you are not passing other vehicles .
A message displays at the top of the map 's turn-by-turn direction list to notify you when an upcoming lane change is required to stay on your navigation route .
The line on the touchscreen shows the upcoming driving path : When the touchscreen displays a message asking you to confirm the lane change , engage the appropriate turn signal .
If you do not confirm the lane change within three seconds , a chime sounds to remind you that Navigate on Autopilot requires your confirmation to change lanes .
If Require Lane Change Confirmation is turned off , Navigate on Autopilot engages the appropriate turn signal , checks for vehicles and objects , and when appropriate , maneuvers Model 3 into the adjacent lane .
If Require Lane Change Confirmation is turned on , you must engage the appropriate turn signal to confirm that you want Navigate on Autopilot to make the lane change .
If you do not confirm the lane change within three seconds , a chime sounds to remind you that Navigate on Autopilot requires your confirmation to change lanes .
Note : If you ignore a route-based lane change suggestion ( for example , you are driving in the left lane while approaching an off-ramp on the right side of the highway ) , Navigate on Autopilot will be unable to maneuver onto the off-ramp and as a result , the navigation system will re-route you to your destination .
Warning : Navigate on Autopilot may not always attempt to exit at an off-ramp or change lanes , even when an exit or lane change is determined by the navigation route .
Always remain alert and be prepared to manually steer onto an off- ramp , or make a lane change to prepare for , or to exit at , an off-ramp or interchange .
80 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Autosteer Be Ready to Assist When attempting to change lanes or maneuver Model 3 , or when approaching construction zones , Navigate on Autopilot may be unable to determine the appropriate driving lane ( for example , complex clover leafs and multi-lane off-ramps ) and the touchscreen displays an alert indicating that Navigate on Autopilot is trying to maneuver and may require assistance .
When you see the message , be prepared to take immediate action to ensure that it is safe and appropriate to complete the lane change or maneuver .
Limitations Autosteer and its associated functions are particularly unlikely to operate as intended when : • Autosteer is unable to accurately determine lane markings .
For example , lane markings are excessively worn , have visible previous markings , have been adjusted due to road construction , are changing quickly ( lanes branching off , crossing over , or merging ) , objects or landscape features are casting strong shadows on the lane markings , or the road surface contains pavement seams or other high-contrast lines .
or weather conditions are interfering with sensor operation .
• The sensors are affected by other electrical equipment or devices that generate ultrasonic waves .
• A vehicle is detected in your blind spot when you engage the turn signal .
Warning : Many unforeseen circumstances can impair the operation of Autosteer .
Always keep this in mind and remember that as a result , Autosteer may not steer Model 3 appropriately .
Always drive attentively and be prepared to take immediate action .
Autopilot 81 Autopark Autopark ( if equipped ) uses data from the ultrasonic sensors and GPS to simplify parking on public roads by maneuvering Model 3 into parallel and perpendicular parking spaces .
Warning : Autopark 's performance depends on the ability of the ultrasonic sensors to determine the vehicle 's proximity to curbs , objects , and other vehicles .
Check to determine if the detected parking space is appropriate and safe .
If so , pull forward and stop approximately a car length ahead of the parking space ( as you normally would when parallel parking or when backing into a perpendicular parking space ) .
Release the steering wheel , shift Model 3 into Reverse , then touch Start Autopark on the touchscreen .
In situations where Autopark can not operate due to inadequate sensor data , the touchscreen displays a message indicating that you must manually park Model 3 .
Note : If you press the brake when Autopark is actively parking Model 3 , the parking process pauses until you touch Resume on the touchscreen .
Autopark does not operate on angled parking spaces .
Autopark may not always detect objects in the parking space .
Always perform visual checks to confirm that a parking space is appropriate and safe .
Do not interfere with the movement of the steering wheel .
Be prepared to apply the brakes to avoid vehicles , pedestrians , or objects .
Warning : When Autopark is active , monitor the touchscreen to ensure that you are aware of the instructions that Autopark is providing .
To Pause Parking To pause Autopark , press the brake pedal once .
Model 3 stops and remains stopped until you touch Resume on the touchscreen .
When driving slowly on a public road , monitor the touchscreen to determine when Autopark has detected a parking space .
Note : The parking icon appears only if the vehicle 's position and/or the circumstances of the surrounding area are such that Autopark can determine an appropriate driving path .
If Autopark can not determine an appropriate path ( for example , when driving on a narrow street where moving into the parking space causes the front of the vehicle to extend into the adjacent lane ) , you can either reposition the vehicle , find a different parking space , or park manually .
82 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Autopark To Cancel Parking Autopark cancels the parking sequence when you manually move the steering wheel , change gears , or touch Cancel on the touchscreen .
• You press the brake pedal while Autopark is paused .
Limitations Autopark is particularly unlikely to operate as intended in these situations : • The road is sloped .
Autopark is designed to operate on flat roads only .
• The curb is constructed of material other than stone , or the curb can not be detected .
• The target parking space is directly adjacent to a wall or pillar ( for example , the last parking space of a row in an underground parking structure ) .
• The sensors are affected by other electrical equipment or devices that generate ultrasonic waves .
Keep this in mind and remember that as a result , Autopark may not steer Model 3 appropriately .
Pay attention when parking Model 3 and stay prepared to immediately take control .
Autopilot 83 Summon Summon ( if equipped ) allows you to automatically park and retrieve Model 3 while you are standing outside the vehicle .
Warning : Summon is designed and intended for use only on parking lots and driveways on private property where the surrounding area is familiar and predictable .
You must continually monitor the vehicle and its surroundings and stay prepared to take immediate action at any time .
Before Using Summon Before operating Summon , use the touchscreen to enable it and customize how you want it to work .
Touch Controls > Autopilot > Summon , then touch Customize and adjust the following settings to suit your preferences : • Bumper Clearance : Set the distance that you want Summon to stop from a detected object ( for example , you may want Summon to stop within just a few inches of a garage wall ) .
Note that this distance applies only to objects that Summon detects directly in front of Model 3 when moving forward , or directly behind Model 3 when reversing .
• Side Clearance : Choose an option to specify how much side clearance you want to allow .
Tight allows Model 3 to enter and exit very narrow parking spaces .
Warning : Parking in a narrow space limits the ability of the sensors to accurately detect the location of obstacles , increasing the risk of damage to Model 3 and/or surrounding objects .
• Require Continuous Press : By default , Summon requires that you press and hold a button on the mobile app or the key fob accessory to move Model 3 during the parking process .
When Require Continuous Press is set to NO , you can press and release the button—you do n't need to hold it down to keep the vehicle moving .
Also , Require Continuous Press must be set to NO if you want to operate Summon using the key fob accessory instead of the mobile app ( see Operating Summon with the Key ( U.S. Only ) on page 85 ) , or if you want to start a parking sequence from inside the vehicle ( see Starting Summon Before Exiting the Vehicle on page 85 ) .
If enabled , the device automatically opens and closes when Model 3 enters or exits during a Summon session .
Warning : Always ensure that Model 3 is fully in or out of a garage before HomeLink lowers the garage door .
Summon can not detect where an overhead door will lower .
Note : When enabled , the HomeLink device automatically opens and closes only when using Summon .
To automate HomeLink in other situations ( such as normal driving ) , you must adjust the HomeLink device 's main settings by touching the HomeLink icon at the top of the touchscreen ( see HomeLink Universal Transceiver on page 122 ) .
Note : All settings are retained until you manually change them .
Using Summon to Park and Retrieve your Vehicle Follow these steps to use Summon to park your Model 3 : 84 Model 3 Owner 's Manual • Align Model 3 within 39 feet ( 12 meters ) of the parking space so Model 3 can follow a straight path into or out of the space in either Drive or Reverse .
Summon • From outside the vehicle , initiate the parking maneuver by touching Summon on the mobile app , then holding down the FORWARD or REVERSE button .
Note : If the Require Continuous Press setting is NO , you do not need to hold down the button , just press and release .
Note : You can also initiate the parking maneuver from inside the vehicle ( see Starting Summon Before Exiting the Vehicle on page 85 ) .
Summon shifts Model 3 into Drive or Reverse ( based on the direction you specified ) and drives into or out of the parking space .
When parking is complete , or if an obstacle is detected , Summon shifts Model 3 into Park .
If you used Summon to park Model 3 , you can then use Summon to return Model 3 back to its original position ( provided the vehicle has remained in Park ) , or to the maximum Summon Distance that you have specified ( whichever comes first ) .
Simply specify the opposite direction on the mobile app and Summon moves the vehicle along the original path , provided no obstructions have been introduced .
If the ultrasonic sensors detect an obstacle , Summon attempts to avoid the obstacle while staying very close to its original path ( Summon does not steer around obstacles ) .
Note : To move Summon multiple times in the same direction ( not to exceed the maximum of 39 feet ( 12 meters ) , cancel Summon and then restart the parking process using the same direction .
Note : Although Summon can move Model 3 a short distance laterally to avoid an obstacle , it does not attempt to steer around an obstacle to return the vehicle to its original driving path .
Therefore , you must continually monitor the vehicle 's movement and its surroundings and remain prepared to stop Model 3 at any time .
Follow these steps to park Model 3 from outside the vehicle using the key fob accessory : 1 .
Note : The hazard lights flash once as Model 3 locks , then within five seconds , Model 3 powers on and the hazard lights flash continuously .
Do not proceed to the next step until the hazard lights are flashing .
If , after five seconds , the hazard lights are not flashing , release the button on the key fob accessory , move closer to Model 3 , and try again .
If Summon receives no further input within ten seconds , Summon cancels .
Press the Front Trunk button on the key fob accessory to move Model 3 forward into the parking space , or press the Rear Trunk button to reverse Model 3 into the parking space .
With Model 3 powered on and the Park gear engaged , double press the Park button on the gear stalk .
Summon now moves Model 3 according to the direction you specified on the touchscreen .
Note : To cancel the parking maneuver before exiting , touch Cancel on the popup window .
Note : If you do not choose a direction of travel on the touchscreen , Summon does not start a parking maneuver when you exit .
Stopping or Canceling Summon You can stop Model 3 at any time while Summon is active by using the mobile app or by pressing any button on the key fob accessory .
Limitations Summon is unlikely to operate as intended in the following types of situations : • The driving path is sloped .
• The sensors are affected by other electrical equipment or devices that generate ultrasonic waves .
Warning : The list above does not represent an exhaustive list of situations that may interfere with proper operation of Summon .
It is the driver 's responsibility to remain in control of Model 3 at all times .
Pay close attention whenever Summon is actively moving Model 3 and stay prepared to take immediate action .
Failure to do so can result in serious property damage , injury or death .
86 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Lane Assist The Autopilot cameras and ultrasonic sensors monitor the markers on the lane you are driving in as well as the areas surrounding Model 3 for the presence of vehicles or other objects .
When an object is detected in your blind spot or close to the side of Model 3 ( such as a vehicle , guard rail , etc .
) , colored lines radiate from the image of your vehicle on the touchscreen .
The location of the lines correspond to the location of the detected object .
The color of the lines ( white , yellow , orange , or red ) represent the object 's proximity to your vehicle , with white being the farthest and red being very close , requiring your immediate attention .
outside of the driving lane , or informing you that a vehicle is in your blind spot or close to the side of your vehicle .
Several external factors can reduce the performance of Lane Assist such as a lack of lane markings or curbs .
It is the driver 's responsibility to stay alert , pay attention to the driving lane and always be aware of other road users .
Failure to do so can result in serious injury or death .
Lane Assist also consists of the following features to assist you in staying safe in the driving lanes : • Lane Departure Avoidance • Emergency Lane Departure Avoidance • Blind Spot Warning Chime Lane Departure Avoidance Lane Departure Avoidance provides steering interventions if Model 3 drifts into ( or close to ) an adjacent lane when driving between 25 and 90 mph ( 40 and 145 km/h ) on major roadways with clearly visible lane markings .
Touch Controls > Autopilot > Lane Departure Avoidance and choose : • OFF : You are not warned of lane departures or potential collisions with a vehicle in an adjacent lane .
• WARNING : The steering wheel vibrates if a front wheel passes over a lane marking while the associated turn signal is off .
• ASSIST : In addition to the steering wheel vibration and a visual warning , Model 3 attempts to steer to a safer position in its driving lane if the vehicle detects drifting or a potential collision while the associated turn signal is off .
Your setting is retained until you manually change it .
When Lane Departure Avoidance detects drifting and applies a steering intervention , the designated lane line is highlighted in blue on the touchscreen .
Note : Lane Departure Avoidance is intended to help keep you safe , but it does not work in every situation and does not replace the need to remain attentive and in control .
Warning : Keep your hands on the steering wheel at all times .
If the vehicle senses Lane Assist also warns you when a desired lane departure is not appropriate .
When you engage the turn signal and a vehicle or object is detected in the adjacent lane you are planning to move into , the touchscreen displays a red lane line to indicate that a vehicle or object is detected .
When the vehicle or object is no longer detected , the lane line returns to normal .
Warning : Lane Assist features are for guidance purposes only and are not intended to replace your own direct visual checks .
Before changing lanes , always visually check the lane you are moving into by using side mirrors and performing the appropriate shoulder checks .
Warning : Never depend on Lane Assist to inform you of unintentionally driving Autopilot 87 Lane Assist your hands are not on the steering wheel , Model 3 sounds a chime and the hazard warning lights flash .
Warning : Steering interventions are minimal and are not designed to move Model 3 out of its driving lane .
Do not rely on steering interventions to avoid side collisions .
Emergency Lane Departure Avoidance For emergency situations , Emergency Lane Departure Avoidance attempts to prevent a potential collision with a vehicle in an adjacent lane by steering Model 3 back into the center of your driving lane .
This operates if the cameras can detect the edge of the lane , such as a lane line or curb .
When this steering intervention is applied , you will hear a chime and the touchscreen displays a warning while highlighting the lane line red until Model 3 returns to the driving lane .
This feature is automatically turned on at the start of every drive .
Blind Spot Warning Chime If you want a chime to sound when a vehicle is in your blind spot and possible collision is detected , touch Controls > Autopilot > Blind Spot Warning Chime .
Warning : Blind Spot Warning Chime can not detect every collision .
It is the driver 's responsibility to remain alert and check their blind spots .
Limitations and Inaccuracies Lane Assist can not always clearly detect lane markings and you may experience unnecessary or invalid warnings in these situations : • Visibility is poor and lane markings are not clearly visible ( due to heavy rain , snow , fog , etc . ) .
The exact detection zone of the ultrasonic sensors varies depending on environmental conditions .
• Objects or landscape features are casting strong shadows on lane markers .
• The sensors are affected by other electrical equipment or devices that generate ultrasonic waves .
You are drifting into another lane but an object ( such as a vehicle ) is not present .
A vehicle in another lane cuts in front of you or drifts into your driving lane .
The sensors are affected by other electrical equipment or devices that generate ultrasonic waves .
Lane markings are excessively worn , have visible previous markings , have been adjusted due to road construction or are changing quickly ( for example , lanes branching off , crossing over , or merging ) .
Warning : The lists above do not represent every possible situation that may interfere with Lane Assist warnings .
Lane Assist may not operate as intended for many other reasons .
To avoid a collision , stay alert and always pay attention to the roadway when driving so you can anticipate the need to take corrective action as early as possible .
Autopilot 89 Collision Avoidance Assist The following collision avoidance features are designed to increase the safety of you and your passengers : • Forward Collision Warning - provides visual and audible warnings in situations when Model 3 detects that there is a high risk of a frontal collision ( see Forward Collision Warning on page 90 ) .
Warning : Forward Collision Warning is for guidance purposes only and is not a substitute for attentive driving and sound judgment .
Keep your eyes on the road when driving and never depend on Forward Collision Warning to warn you of a potential collision .
Depending on Forward Collision Warning to warn you of a potential collision can result in serious injury or death .
Warning : Automatic Emergency Braking is not designed to prevent all collisions .
In certain situations , it can minimize the impact of a frontal collision by attempting to reduce your driving speed .
Depending on Automatic Emergency Braking to avoid a collision can result in serious injury or death .
Depending on Obstacle-Aware Acceleration to avoid a collision can result in serious injury or death .
Forward Collision Warning The forward looking camera ( s ) and the radar sensor monitor the area in front of Model 3 for the presence of an object such as a vehicle , motorcycle , bicycle , or pedestrian .
If a collision is considered likely unless you take immediate corrective action , Forward Collision Warning is designed to sound a chime and highlight the vehicle in front of you in red on the touchscreen .
Warnings cancel automatically when the risk of a collision has been reduced ( for example , you have decelerated or stopped Model 3 , or the object in front of your vehicle has moved out of your driving path ) .
If immediate action is not taken when Model 3 issues a Forward Collision Warning , Automatic Emergency Braking ( if enabled ) may automatically apply the brakes if a collision is considered imminent ( see Automatic Emergency Braking on page 91 ) .
Instead of the default warning level of Medium , you can turn the warning Off , or you can choose to be warned Late or Early .
Note : Your chosen setting for Forward Collision Warning is retained until you manually change it .
The 90 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Collision Avoidance Assist area being monitored by Forward Collision Warning can be adversely affected by road and weather conditions .
Warning : Forward Collision Warning is designed only to provide visual and audible alerts .
It does not attempt to apply the brakes or decelerate Model 3 .
Warning : Forward Collision Warning may provide a warning in situations where the likelihood of collision may not exist .
Stay alert and always pay attention to the area in front of Model 3 so you can anticipate whether any action is required .
Warning : Forward Collision Warning does not provide a warning when the driver is already applying the brake .
Automatic Emergency Braking The forward looking camera ( s ) and the radar sensor are designed to determine the distance from a detected object traveling in front of Model 3 .
When a frontal collision is considered unavoidable , Automatic Emergency Braking is designed to apply the brakes to reduce the severity of the impact .
When Automatic Emergency Braking applies the brakes , the touchscreen displays a visual warning and sounds a chime .
You may also notice abrupt downward movement of the brake pedal .
The brake lights turn on to alert other road users that you are slowing down .
Automatic Emergency Braking does not apply the brakes , or stops applying the brakes , when : • You turn the steering wheel sharply .
• You press and release the brake pedal while Automatic Emergency Braking is applying the brakes .
• You accelerate hard while Automatic Emergency Braking is applying the brakes .
Automatic Emergency Braking is always enabled when you start Model 3 .
Warning : It is strongly recommended that you do not disable Automatic Emergency Braking .
If you disable it , Model 3 does not automatically apply the brakes in situations where a collision is considered likely .
Warning : Automatic Emergency Braking is designed to reduce the severity of an impact .
Warning : Several factors can affect the performance of Automatic Emergency Braking , causing either no braking or inappropriate or untimely braking , such as when a vehicle is partially in the path of travel or there is road debris .
It is the driver ’ s responsibility to drive safely and remain in control of the vehicle at all times .
Never depend on Automatic Emergency Braking to avoid or reduce the impact of a collision .
Warning : Automatic Emergency Braking is designed to reduce the impact of frontal collisions only and does not function when Model 3 is in Reverse .
Warning : Automatic Emergency Braking is not a substitute for maintaining a safe traveling distance between you and the vehicle in front of you .
Warning : The brake pedal moves downward abruptly during automatic braking events .
Always ensure that the brake pedal can move freely .
Do not place material under or on top of the Tesla- supplied driver ’ s floor mat ( including an additional mat ) and always ensure that the driver ’ s floor mat is properly secured .
Failure to do so can impede the ability of the brake pedal to move freely .
Autopilot 91 Collision Avoidance Assist Obstacle-Aware Acceleration Obstacle-Aware Acceleration is designed to reduce the impact of a collision by reducing motor torque if Model 3 detects an object in its driving path .
For example , Model 3 , while parked in front of a closed garage door with the Drive gear engaged , detects that you have pressed hard on the accelerator pedal .
Although Model 3 still accelerates and hits the garage door , the reduced torque may result in less damage .
Warning : Several factors can affect the performance of Obstacle-Aware Acceleration , causing an inappropriate or untimely reduction in motor torque .
It is the driver 's responsibility to drive safely and remain in control of Model 3 at all times .
Warning : The limitations previously described do not represent an exhaustive list of situations that may interfere with proper operation of Collision Avoidance Assist features .
These features may fail to provide their intended function for many other reasons .
It is the driver ’ s responsibility to avoid collisions by staying alert , paying attention , and taking corrective action as early as possible .
92 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Speed Assist How Speed Assist Works When the Speed Limit Warning is turned on , the touchscreen displays a speed limit as determined by GPS data .
You can touch this speed limit sign to automatically change the set speed to the detected speed limit ( including any offsets that you have set ) .
Always drive at a safe speed based on traffic and road conditions .
Controlling Speed Assist To adjust the Speed Limit Warning setting , touch Controls > Autopilot > Speed Limit Warning , then choose one of these options : • Off - Speed limit warnings do not display and chimes are not sounded .
• Display - Speed limit signs display on the touchscreen and the sign increases in size when you exceed the determined limit .
You can also specify how the speed limit is determined : • Relative - The speed limit is determined automatically based on detected traffic signs and GPS data .
The GPS can miscalculate a road 's location and provide the speed limit for a directly adjacent road that may have a different speed limit .
For example , the GPS can assume Model 3 is on a freeway or highway when it is actually on a nearby surface street , and vice versa .
Note : Your chosen setting is retained until you manually change it .
Limitations and Inaccuracies Speed Assist may not be fully functional or may provide inaccurate information in these situations : In situations where Speed Assist is unable to determine a speed limit ( for example , speed limit signs and GPS data are not available at the current location ) , or if Speed Assist is uncertain that an acquired speed limit is accurate ( for example , although a speed limit sign was initially detected , some time has passed before a subsequent sign has been detected ) , the touchscreen may not display a speed limit sign and warnings do not take effect .
If you set the speed limit warning to Display ( see Controlling Speed Assist on page 93 ) and exceed the determined speed limit , the speed limit sign on the touchscreen increases in size .
If you set the speed limit warning to Chime ( see Controlling Speed Assist on page 93 ) and exceed the determined speed limit , the speed limit sign on the touchscreen increases in size and Model 3 also sounds a warning chime .
Note : Speed limit warnings go away after ten seconds , or when Model 3 slows down below the specified limit .
• The speed limits stored in the GPS database are incorrect or outdated .
• Model 3 is being driven in an area where GPS data is not available .
• Traffic signs do not conform to standard recognizable formats .
Warning : The list above does not represent an exhaustive list of situations that may interfere with proper operation of Speed Assist .
Speed Assist may fail to provide warnings for many other reasons .
94 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Controls Overview Touch Controls on the bottom corner of the touchscreen to control features and customize Model 3 to suit your preferences .
The Controls window appears over the map .
Touch an option on the left side of the window to display the associated controls and settings .
By default , Quick Controls displays for quicker access to commonly used settings .
To close the Controls window , touch the X in the top left corner , touch Controls again , or swipe down on the window .
When an information icon displays beside a specific setting , touch it to display a popup that provides helpful details about the associated setting .
Note : The following illustrations are for demonstration purposes only .
Depending on vehicle options , software version and market region , the options available may be different .
When you select an item from this list , its associated controls display in the main viewing area .
The options available for your chosen controls category display here .
Control exterior and interior lights ( see Lights on page 49 ) and turn the following settings on or off : • Auto High Beam : If on , the high beam headlights can automatically switch to low beam when there is light ( for example , from an oncoming vehicle ) detected in front of Model 3 .
• Headlights after Exit : If on , the headlights remain on when you stop driving and park Model 3 in low lighting conditions .
They automatically turn off after one minute or when you lock Model 3 .
• Steering Wheel Lights : If on , the arrows associated with the scroll buttons on the steering wheel are backlit when the headlights are turned on .
Unlock on Park : If on , doors automatically unlock when you engage the Park gear ( see Interior Locking and Unlocking on page 13 ) .
Lock Confirmation Sound : If on , you will hear an audible sound when you lock Model 3 .
Controls Using the Touchscreen 97 Display Manually control the brightness and the DAY ( light background ) or NIGHT ( dark background ) setting of the touchscreen .
When set to AUTO , the brightness changes automatically between day and night brightness based on ambient lighting conditions .
Brightness : Drag the slider to manually control the brightness level of the touchscreen .
When Auto brightness is on , the touchscreen is further adjusted based on both the surroundings and by learning your preferences ( for example , it remembers the type of manual adjustments you make ) .
Screen Clean Mode : Disable the touchscreen momentarily for cleaning purposes .
• Energy Display : Display remaining energy and charging units as either a percentage of battery energy remaining , or as an estimate of the distance that you can drive .
• Tire Pressure : Choose if tire pressures are displayed in BAR or PSI .
When you change the language , you experience a brief delay as the vehicle shuts down and restarts the touchscreen .
Chill limits acceleration for a slightly smoother and gentler ride , whereas Standard or Sport ( depending on vehicle configuration ) provides the normal level of acceleration .
Note : When Chill is selected , Chill displays on the touchscreen above the driving speed .
Steering Mode : Adjust the amount of effort required to turn the steering wheel .
Sport feels more responsive whereas Comfort feels easier to drive and park ( see Adjusting Steering Effort on page 42 ) .
Regenerative Braking : When you release the accelerator when driving , regenerative braking slows Model 3 and feeds any surplus energy back to the Battery .
If set to LOW , Model 3 does not slow down as quickly , but also feeds less energy back to the Battery ( see Regenerative Braking on page 56 ) .
Note : Regardless of the setting selected , the energy gained by regenerative braking is reduced if the Battery is full , or is extremely cold or hot ( in which case , surplus energy is used to heat or cool it ) .
Creep : When on , Model 3 applies forward torque in Drive and backwards torque in Reverse when you release the brake pedal ( similar to a conventional vehicle with an automatic transmission ) .
The torque moves the vehicle slowly on flat roads , but may require you to press the accelerator pedal in some situations ( for example , when on a steep hill or driveway ) .
When off , Model 3 is free rolling when you let your foot off the brake pedal and the motor does not apply torque until the accelerator pedal is pressed .
You can adjust this setting only when Model 3 is in Park .
Warning : Never rely on Creep to apply enough torque to prevent your vehicle from rolling down a hill .
Always apply brakes to remain stopped or the accelerator to proceed up the hill .
• Navigate on Autopilot ( Beta ) : Navigate on Autopilot automatically exits at off-ramps and interchanges based on your navigation route and can also make lane changes designed to prepare for exits and minimize the driving time to your destination ( see Navigate on Autopilot on page 78 ) .
• CUSTOMIZE SUMMON : Specify how Summon operates whenever it parks or retrieves your vehicle .
• Offset : If relative speed limit is selected , set a speed limit offset if you want to be alerted only when you exceed the offset speed limit by a specified amount ( see Speed Assist on page 93 ) .
• Forward Collision Warning : Specify if and when you want to receive visual and audible warnings in situations where there is a high risk of a frontal collision ( see Collision Avoidance Assist on page 90 ) .
• Lane Departure Warning : Specify if you want the steering wheel to vibrate slightly if a front wheel passes over a lane marking and the associated turn signal is off ( see Lane Assist on page 87 ) .
• Obstacle-Aware Acceleration : Specify if you want to automatically reduce acceleration when an obstacle is detected in front of your vehicle while driving at low speeds ( see Collision Avoidance Assist on page 90 ) .
Decreasing all the way to the left mutes the instructions .
You can also mute navigation instructions when a navigation route is active by touching the volume icon on the turn-by-turn direction list .
Customize how the navigation system works by adjusting these settings : • Touch Trip Planner ( if available in your market region ) to minimize the time you spend driving and charging ( see Trip Planner on page 111 ) .
• Touch Avoid Ferries to be automatically rerouted to avoid ferries .
• Touch Avoid Tolls to be automatically rerouted to avoid tolls .
• Touch Use HOV Lanes to include High Occupancy Vehicle ( HOV ) lanes on your navigation routes .
This is particularly useful when using Navigate on Autopilot ( see Navigate on Autopilot on page 78 ) .
Note : You can also display navigation settings by touching the settings icon on the map ( see Maps and Navigation on page 108 ) .
Note : The volume setting applies only to the navigation system 's spoken instructions .
Volume for Media Player and Phone remains unchanged .
Cabin Overheat Protection : Reduce the temperature of the cabin in extremely hot ambient conditions for a period of up to twelve hours after you exit Model 3 ( see Cabin Overheat Protection on page 106 ) .
Note : Cabin Overheat Protection operates only when the energy remaining in the Battery is above 20 % .
Note : To disable Allow Mobile Access , enter your Tesla account credentials on the touchscreen .
Controls Service Wiper Service Mode : Make wiper blades easy to access ( see Wiper Blades and Washer Jets on page 148 ) .
Caution : Headlights should only be adjusted by Tesla Service .
Transporting : Prepare Model 3 for transporting by keeping it in Neutral ( which disengages the parking brake and prevents damage to the rear motor that is caused by wheels turning as Model 3 is pulled onto a flatbed truck ) .
and restore all customized settings to their factory defaults .
Learn more about your vehicle 's software version and the status of software updates .
• Customize how often you want to receive software updates by touching Software Update Preferences .
Software Glovebox Naming Your Vehicle To further personalize Model 3 , you can name it .
The name of your Model 3 appears in the mobile app .
Enter the new name in the popup , then touch Save .
This feature is protected by a 4-digit PIN that you create when enabling it for the first time , and which must be entered whenever you want to disable and enable it .
Ensure the vehicle is in Park .
Touch Controls > Safety & Security > Speed Limit Mode on the touchscreen or CONTROLS in your mobile app .
Select the maximum driving speed that you would like to limit the vehicle to .
Drag the slider to the ON position .
Enter the 4-digit PIN that you want to use to disable and enable Speed Limit Mode .
Note : If you forget the PIN , you can disable Speed Limit Mode by entering the login credentials for your Tesla Account .
Warning : Driving downhill can increase driving speed , causing the vehicle to exceed your chosen maximum speed .
Warning : Speed Limit Mode is not a replacement for good judgment , driver training , and the need to closely monitor roadway speed limits and driving conditions .
Accidents can occur at any speed .
and restore all customized settings to their factory defaults .
Before erasing , Model 3 verifies your credentials by prompting you to enter the user name and password associated with your Tesla Account .
102 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Climate Controls Overview of Climate Controls Climate controls are always available at the bottom of the touchscreen .
To turn the climate control system on , touch the fan icon or adjust the cabin temperature .
To turn it off , touch the fan icon and then touch the off button near the center of the popup window .
By default , climate control is set to the Auto setting , which maintains optimum comfort in all but the most severe weather conditions .
When you adjust the cabin temperature in the Auto setting , the system automatically adjusts the heating , air conditioning , air distribution , and fan speed to maintain the cabin at your selected temperature .
To override the Auto setting , touch the fan icon , turn off the Auto setting , then manually adjust your settings ( see Adjusting Climate Control Settings on page 104 ) .
If you 've manually adjusted individual settings , you can also revert back to Auto at any time by touching AUTO on the climate control popup window .
Note : The following illustration is provided for demonstration purposes only .
When operating , the associated seat icon displays twisting lines that turn red to indicate the setting level .
If equipped with the premium package , rear seats are also equipped with seat heaters ( see Operating Seat Heaters on page 105 ) .
Note : To conserve energy , a seat heater in a passenger seating position automatically turns off if an occupant is not detected when the Drive gear is engaged .
Touch an up or down arrow to change the cabin temperature .
To apply a temperature setting to both the driver and passenger side , touch SYNC on the popup that appears when you touch an arrow .
When you apply the same temperature to both sides , only one temperature setting displays .
Touch SYNC again to display separate temperature settings for the driver and passenger .
Touch the fan icon to turn on climate control and to manually customize settings to suit your preferences ( see Adjusting Climate Control Settings on page 104 ) .
Touch and hold the fan icon to quickly turn off climate control .
If your vehicle is equipped with the premium package , touch this icon to access controls for the rear seat heaters .
The windshield defroster distributes air flow to the windshield .
Touch a second time to defrost the windshield ( the icon turns red and the heating and fan operate at maximum levels ) .
Touch a third time to turn off and restore the air distribution , heating , and fan to their previous settings .
Touch to warm up the rear window .
If equipped with the premium package , the exterior side mirrors are also heated whenever the rear window defroster is operating .
Warning : To avoid burns resulting from prolonged use , individuals who have peripheral neuropathy , or whose capacity to feel pain is limited because of diabetes , age , neurological injury , or some other condition , should exercise caution when using the climate control system and seat heaters .
Note : The climate control system is powered by the high voltage battery .
Using the Touchscreen 103 Climate Controls Adjusting Climate Control Settings To override the Auto setting , touch the fan icon , turn off the Auto setting , then use the buttons that appear to manually adjust settings .
In addition to the settings shown , if Model 3 is in Park , the Keep Climate On and Dog Mode setting displays when you touch the fan icon when the vehicle is in Park ( see Keep Climate On and Dog Mode on page 106 ) .
Touch AUTO to turn the Auto setting on or off .
Touch to turn the climate control system off .
If equipped with the premium package , the climate control settings window has two tabs .
The general settings tab displays by default and is represented by the fan icon .
Touch the seat heater icon to access controls for both the front and rear seat heaters ( see Operating Seat Heaters on page 105 ) .
You can choose more than one location .
Note : When air is directed to the foot-level vents , air continues to flow to the windshield vents to assist in defogging .
When air is directed to the face-level vents , air does not flow to the windshield .
Touch to turn air flow to the rear cabin area on or off .
When on , air flows from the vents located at the back of the center console .
Touch to adjust air flow from the front passenger vent .
Touch to choose how air is drawn into Model 3 .
Note : Adjusting the fan speed may change the selected setting for how air is drawn into Model 3 in order to increase or reduce air flow .
Touch to turn the air conditioning system on or off .
Note : Because Model 3 runs much quieter than a gasoline-powered vehicle , you may notice the sound of the air conditioning compressor as it is operating .
Touch to adjust air flow from the driver 's vent .
104 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Climate Controls Operating Seat Heaters To control the front seat heaters for the driver and passenger , touch the corresponding control on the main climate control area at the bottom of the touchscreen .
To control the rear seat heaters ( if equipped ) or access duplicate controls for the front seat heaters , touch the fan icon , then touch the seat heater icon followed by the seat for which you want to adjust heating .
When operating , the associated seat icon displays twisting lines that turn red to indicate the setting level .
You can touch All Off to turn off all seat heaters simultaneously .
Adjusting the Front Vents Model 3 has a unique horizontal face-level vent that spans the width of the dashboard .
Using the touchscreen , you can pinpoint exactly where you want to direct the air flowing from this vent when heating or cooling the front cabin area .
Passenger vent and controls When the face-level vent is on you can adjust the direction of the air flow from each vent .
To adjust the direction of the air flow , simply touch the radiating air waves from the corresponding vent on the touchscreen .
The air flows in a single stream when centered or splits into mirrored air streams when air is directed outward or inward from the center of the vent .
Note : When you split a vent into two separate air flows , the air flow in each direction is not as strong as when all air is flowing in a single direction .
Note : Outside air is drawn into Model 3 through the grill in front of the windshield .
Keep the grill clear of obstructions , such as leaves and snow .
Adjusting the Rear Vents Model 3 has vents located at the back of the center console where air flows from when the setting is turned on from the touchscreen .
To direct the flow of air in the rear cabin area , adjust the vents at the rear of the center console up , down , or from side to side as necessary .
Using the Touchscreen 105 Climate Controls Keep Climate On and Dog Mode The Keep Climate On and Dog settings allow you to keep the climate control system running when in Park , even after you 've left Model 3 .
Both settings are useful when it is important to maintain the cabin temperature in hot or cold weather conditions ( for example , when leaving groceries in Model 3 on hot days , you may want to use Keep Climate On to prevent spoilage ) .
Dog mode keeps your pet comfortable while also displaying the current cabin temperature on the touchscreen so people nearby are informed that your pet does not need to be rescued .
The Keep Climate On and Dog settings are available only when Model 3 is in Park .
Touch the fan icon then touch Keep Climate On or Dog .
The climate control system maintains your climate settings until you shift out of Park or manually turn it off .
If the Battery 's charge level drops to ten percent , the climate control system automatically turns off and the Tesla mobile app sends you a notification reminding you to check on anything that you have left in Model 3 .
The next time you drive Model 3 , the climate control system continues operating using the previous settings from your most recent trip .
Note : Software updates can not be performed when Dog Mode or Keep Climate On is active .
Warning : You can adjust the climate control system remotely using the mobile app .
However , if you use the mobile app to turn off the climate control system , Keep Climate On and Dog Mode stop operating .
Warning : Keep Climate On and Dog Mode turn off when the battery charge drops to 20 % .
Avoid using when the battery charge is low .
When leaving a dog or pet in Model 3 , you must ensure that you have your phone with you and that the Tesla mobile app is running .
This allows you to proactively monitor the cabin temperature .
To ensure the safety and comfort of your dog or pet , always make sure you have adequate cellular coverage to receive notifications and allow enough time to return to Model 3 should the climate control system stop operating—on hot days , the cabin temperature can become dangerously high within a few minutes .
Warning : Check local laws for any restrictions on leaving pets unattended in your vehicle .
Cabin Air Filter Model 3 has an air filter that prevents pollen , industrial fallout , road dust and other particles from entering through the vents .
Tesla recommends replacing the cabin air filter every 2 years .
Cabin Overheat Protection The climate control system can reduce the temperature of the cabin in extremely hot ambient conditions for a period of up to twelve hours after you exit Model 3 .
Note : Cabin Overheat Protection operates only when the energy remaining in the Battery is above 20 % .
Warning : Never leave children or pets in the vehicle unattended .
Due to automatic shut-off or extreme outside conditions , the inside of the vehicle can become dangerously hot , even when Cabin Overheat Protection is enabled .
106 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Climate Controls Climate Control Operating Tips • You can direct the face-level vents toward the windows to help defrost or defog them .
• When you use the mobile app to turn on the climate control system , it automatically turns off after four hours or if the charge level drops to 20 % .
To cool or heat the cabin for a longer period , you must turn it on again .
• It is possible that your charge port latch may freeze in place in extremely cold weather or icy conditions .
In cases where you can not remove or insert the charge cable , or the car is not Supercharging due to the latch being frozen in place , use your Tesla mobile app to precondition your vehicle on HI for approximately 30-45 minutes ( you must use your mobile app to precondition the vehicle ; setting your climate to HI using the touchscreen will not be effective ) .
This helps thaw ice on the charge port latch so the charge cable can be removed or inserted .
• If the climate control system is louder than you prefer , manually reduce the fan speed .
• In addition to cooling the interior , the air conditioning compressor also cools the Battery .
Therefore , in hot weather , the air conditioning compressor can turn on even if you turned it off .
This is normal because the system ’ s priority is to cool the Battery to ensure it stays within an optimum temperature range to support longevity and optimum performance .
• To ensure the climate control system operates efficiently , close all windows and ensure that the exterior grill in front of the windshield is free of ice , snow , leaves , and other debris .
• In very humid conditions , it is normal for the windshield to fog slightly when you first turn on the air conditioning .
Extra water produced by the dehumidifying process is drained underneath .
• To reduce the temperature in the cabin in hot weather conditions , the fan may turn on to vent the cabin when the vehicle is parked .
Using the Touchscreen 107 Maps and Navigation Overview The touchscreen displays a map at all times .
Hold and drag a finger to move the map in any direction .
Rotate the map in any direction by holding and turning two fingers .
Touch the icon in the top right corner of the map to set the map 's orientation : North Up - North is always at the top of the screen .
Heading Up - The direction you are driving is always at the top of the screen .
The map rotates as you change direction .
This icon has an integrated compass that indicates the direction you are driving .
Note : When navigating , this icon also allow you to toggle to the route overview which allows you to view an overview of your navigation route ( see Navigating on page 109 ) .
When you rotate or move the map , your current location is no longer tracked .
The message `` Tracking Disabled '' displays briefly next to the map orientation icon and the icon turns gray .
Touch the + and - icons to zoom the map in and out on your current or chosen location .
When you zoom in or out using these icons , tracking remains enabled .
Touch the following icons to customize what the map displays and to access navigation settings : Note : These icons disappear after a few seconds when not in use .
Green lines indicate no traffic ; orange lines indicate light traffic ; red lines indicate moderate traffic ; and pink lines indicate heavy traffic .
To ensure traffic is easy to identify along a navigation route , green traffic lines display under the blue route line , whereas orange , red , and pink traffic lines display on top of the blue route line .
Display/hide all charging locations and a popup list that includes the city and proximity of the corresponding stations on the map .
Charging locations include Tesla Superchargers , destination chargers , and public chargers that you have used previously .
Note : Superchargers are always displayed on the map , even when charging locations are not displayed .
Decreasing all the way to the left mutes the instructions .
You can also mute navigation instructions when a navigation route is active by touching the volume icon on the turn-by-turn direction list .
Customize how the navigation system works by adjusting these settings : • Touch Trip Planner ( if available in your market region ) to minimize the time you spend driving and charging ( see Trip Planner on page 111 ) .
• Touch Avoid Ferries to be automatically rerouted to avoid ferries .
• Touch Avoid Tolls to be automatically rerouted to avoid tolls .
• Touch Use HOV Lanes to include High Occupancy Vehicle ( HOV ) lanes on your navigation routes .
This is particularly useful when using Navigate on Autopilot ( see Navigate on Autopilot on page 78 ) .
Note : You can also access the above navigation settings by touching Controls > Navigation .
Note : The volume setting applies only to the navigation system 's spoken instructions .
Volume for Media Player and Phone remains unchanged .
Drop a pin by pressing and holding your finger anywhere on the map .
When you drop a pin , or touch an existing pin , the chosen location is centered on the map , and a popup window provides information about the location .
From this popup , you can navigate to the location , call the location ( if a phone number is available ) and add or remove the location from your list of favorite destinations ( see Recent , Favorite , Home and Work Destinations on page 112 ) .
You can also choose a saved Home or Work location and select from a list of recently used locations ( the most recent displays at the top of the list ) , including charging stations you have visited .
When you specify a location , the touchscreen zooms out to provide an overview of the route you need to travel , and , after calculating the route , zooms back in to your starting point and begins to provide instructions , and a turn- by-turn direction list that displays the first navigation instruction and an estimate of total mileage , driving time , and arrival time .
Note : You can remotely start navigation in your vehicle by using your IOS® or AndroidTM device 's `` share '' functionality after giving access to the Tesla mobile app .
You can touch the instruction to expand the list to show each turn on your journey .
Note the following about the turn-by-turn direction list : • A battery displays below the destination to provide an estimate of how much battery energy will remain when you reach your destination .
Touch to expand battery information to show a round trip estimate back to your starting point .
• If charging is needed to reach your destination and Trip Planner is enabled ( and available in your market region ) , the navigation route automatically includes Supercharger stops ( see Trip Planner on page 111 ) and you may need to touch BEGIN TRIP to initiate navigation .
• If you wo n't have enough energy to reach your destination and there is no Supercharger on the route , an alert tells you that charging is needed to reach your destination .
• Each turn is preceded by the distance to the maneuver .
• To see the bottom of the list , you may need to drag the list upward .
• Touch the top of the list again to minimize it .
While navigating , the map tracks your location and displays the current leg of your trip .
You can display the entire route at any time .
Using the Touchscreen 109 Maps and Navigation If Navigate on Autopilot is enabled , you can turn it on for the navigation route by touching Navigate on Autopilot in the turn-by-turn direction list .
Navigate on Autopilot is an extension of Autosteer that automatically changes lanes and steers Model 3 onto the appropriate exit ( s ) when navigating on controlled access roads ( such as freeways ) .
The route overview icon displays when a navigation route is active .
Touch this icon at any time to view an overview of your navigation route , or to change the orientation of the map ( see Overview on page 108 ) , which also zooms the map to show the current leg of your trip .
The black pin at the end of the route line represents your destination .
Note : You can also mute the volume of the navigation system by pressing the scroll button on the left side of the steering wheel while navigation instructions are being spoken .
A volume control specific to navigation instructions is also available by touching the settings icon on the map ( see Overview on page 108 ) .
Note : If a data connection is not available , onboard maps allow you to navigate to any location , but you must enter the location 's exact and complete address .
Charging Locations Superchargers always display on the map , represented by red pins that you can touch to display more information about the Supercharger location , navigate to it , or mark it as a favorite .
When you touch the pin for a Supercharger location on the map , information about the Supercharger location is displayed , including the total number of Superchargers , the number of Superchargers available , the address of the Supercharger , and its approximate distance from you .
At locations that have multiple Superchargers , a row of bars displays above the icon , with each bar representing a Supercharger .
This provides a quick visual to indicate how many superchargers are in use .
Note : A supercharger pin is colored black if the supercharger is on your current navigation route .
The Supercharger location may be out of operation or is operating at a reduced capacity .
Touch the pin to display details .
Touch the map 's charging icon to display all nearby charging stations of the map .
In addition to the Superchargers that are always displayed , the map shows destination chargers and any public charging stations that you have previously used .
Display details about a charging location by touching its pin .
Touch to display more information such as usage restrictions and available charge current .
The charging list also displays your proximity to these charging stations .
Note : When the map is zoomed out and more than one Tesla Wall Connector is available in an area , the pin is round and displays the number of stations .
Touch the pin to zoom in .
Then you can touch an individual pins for detail about the charging location .
Predicting Energy Usage When navigating to a destination , Model 3 helps you anticipate your charging needs by calculating the amount of energy that remains when you reach your destination .
When the turn-by- turn direction list is compressed , touch the top of the list to expand it .
A popup warning displays at the bottom of the turn-by-turn direction list in these situations : • A yellow warning displays when you have very little energy remaining to reach your destination and should drive slowly to conserve energy .
If you also want to know if you have enough energy for a round trip , touch the energy calculation to display an estimate of your round trip energy usage .
Online Routing Model 3 detects real-time traffic conditions and automatically adjusts the estimated driving and arrival times based on traffic .
In situations where traffic conditions will delay your estimated time of arrival and an alternate route is available , the navigation system can reroute you to your destination .
You can also specify the minimum amount of minutes that must be saved before you are rerouted by touching the arrows associated with the Re-Route if it saves more than setting .
Trip Planner Trip Planner ( available in some market regions ) helps you take longer road trips with confidence .
If reaching your destination requires charging , Trip Planner routes you through the appropriate Supercharger locations .
Trip Planner selects a route and provides charging times to minimize the amount of time you spend driving and charging .
When Trip Planner is enabled and charging is required to reach your destination , the turn- by-turn direction list includes Supercharger stops and a recommended charging time at each Supercharger , and an estimate of how much energy will be available when you arrive at the Supercharger .
To remove Supercharger stops and display only directions , touch Remove charging stops at the bottom of the list of directions ( if you remove charging stops , the turn-by-turn direction list may display an alert indicating that charging is needed to reach your destination ) .
To add Supercharger stops to the directions , touch Add charging stops .
While charging at a Supercharger , the charging screen displays the remaining charging time needed to drive to your next Supercharger stop , or destination ( if no further charging is needed ) .
If you charge for a shorter or longer length of time , the charging time for subsequent Supercharger stops is adjusted .
Note : You can also monitor remaining charging time needed in the Tesla Mobile App .
Note : If a Supercharger located on your route experiences an outage , Trip Planner displays a Using the Touchscreen 111 Maps and Navigation notification and reroutes you to a different Supercharger location .
If Trip Planner estimates that you wo n't have enough energy for your round trip , and there are no Superchargers available on your route , Trip Planner displays an alert at the top of the turn-by-turn direction list notifying you that charging is needed to reach your destination .
Recent , Favorite , Home and Work Destinations When you touch Navigate on the map , a list of Recent destinations appear and you can easily navigate to any recent destination by selecting it from the list .
If you frequently drive to a destination , you may want to add it as a favorite to avoid having to enter the location 's name or address each time .
When you add a destination as a Favorite , you can easily navigate to it by touching Navigate > Favorites and then selecting it from the list of favorites .
To add a destination to your Favorites list touch its pin on the map , then touch the heart icon on the popup window that appears .
You will be prompted to name the Favorite .
The heart becomes solid gray and the destination is included on the Favorites list .
The top of the navigation list also provides shortcuts for Home and Work locations .
Touch to set an address to either of these locations .
After entering the address , touch SAVE AS HOME or SAVE AS WORK .
Then simply touch these shortcuts whenever you want to navigate home or to work .
To change the location associated with Home or Work , press and hold the shortcut icon and enter a new address in the popup window .
To delete , press and hold the shortcut button , then touch CLEAR HOME or CLEAR WORK .
Note : Based on your usage patterns , you may be prompted to save a location as Home or Work .
Note : Once a Home or Work location is saved , Model 3 may prompt you to navigate to your Work location in the mornings and to your Home location in the evenings and tell you how long it will take to arrive based on current traffic conditions .
For security reasons , if you sell Model 3 , it is recommended that you delete your Home and Work Locations .
You can delete these individually or you can perform a factory reset to erase all personal data ( see Erasing Personal Data on page 102 ) .
The touchscreen displays a message informing you when new maps are installed .
112 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Media and Audio Overview Touch the Media Player icon at the bottom of the touchscreen to stream music or podcasts ( if available ) , and listen toFM or Internet radio stations .
Note : The media options available to you depend on market region and options chosen at time of purchase .
Media Player provides three different levels of viewing that you can access by dragging the Media Player window upward or downward .
The Miniplayer , which occupies the least amount of space on the touchscreen , displays what 's currently playing and provides only the basic functions , mostly associated with what 's playing .
Drag upward to display Recents and Favorites and access the icons you can use to change your media source ( described next ) .
Drag upward again to browse through all available options for the chosen type of source content .
Use the tabs on the left to narrow down the type of content you want to browse through—the associated content displays on the right .
For Radio , you can browse through Favorite Stations or you can touch Direct Tune to enter the frequency of a specific channel .
Volume Control Roll the scroll button on the left side of the steering wheel up or down to increase or decrease volume respectively .
The scroll button adjusts the volume for media , navigation instructions , or phone calls , based on what is currently being heard through the speakers .
You can also adjust the volume by touching the arrows associated with the speaker icon on the bottom of the touchscreen .
To mute the volume , press the left scroll button .
Note : Pressing the left scroll button during a phone call mutes both the sound and your microphone .
Note : If you 're playing media and you receive a phone call , or the navigation system is speaking directions , the volume of what you are listening to is temporarily muted .
Select a filter to narrow the scope of your search , or leave it at its default setting to include top results from all available source content .
If available , touch HD® to play high definition versions of the selected frequency .
FM Radio If available in your market region and location , Media Player provides FM radio stations that you can select from the Radio source .
Touch the next or previous arrows to move from one frequency to the next ( or previous ) .
If available , touch HD® to play high definition versions of the selected frequency .
For easy access to radio stations you listen to frequently , mark it as a favorite so it 's readily available in the Favorites list ( see Favorites and Recents on page 114 ) .
Internet Radio and Music Streaming Services If equipped with premium connectivity , internet radio and music streaming services are available over a data connection .
To listen , touch the Media Player icon and choose the streaming service you want to listen to .
Using the Touchscreen 113 Media and Audio Tesla may provide account credentials for some internet radio and music streaming services .
If you would like to use your own account , scroll to the bottom of the streaming service window , touch Sign In , and enter your account information .
Browse through the available categories and/or stations , then touch what you want to play .
When browsing through a large category such as genres , you may need to enlarge the window by dragging upward .
When you choose an option that displays multiple results on a new window , touch the BACK button at the top of the window to return to the main browse page .
You can also use voice commands ( available when speaking the English language ) to play a specific song , artist , or album from an Internet radio service ( see Using Voice Commands on page 119 ) .
When listening to some internet radio or music streaming services , options available on Miniplayer may vary depending on what you are listening to : • Touch the next ( or previous ) arrows to play the next ( and in some cases previous ) available station , episode , or track being provided by the Internet radio service .
• Touch the thumbs up or thumbs down icon to like or dislike a song or podcast .
• Touch the DJ icon ( if available ) to include commentary for the content you are streaming .
On the Miniplayer , drag the slider to the desired location or touch the rewind/ fast forward icons to move back or forward 15 seconds at a time .
Favorites and Recents For most source content , your favorites display at the top of Media Player 's expanded view for easy access .
To add a currently playing station , podcast , or audio file to your Favorites list , touch the Favorites icon on Miniplayer .
To remove an item as a favorite , touch the highlighted Favorites icon on Miniplayer .
You can also remove multiple favorites by expanding Miniplayer one level to show all favorites for the applicable type of source content .
Then press and hold any favorite .
An X appears on all favorites and you can then touch the X associated with any favorite you want to remove from your Favorites list .
To see selections that you have recently played , scroll up one level from Miniplayer and touch Recent .
Your recently played selections are updated continuously so you do n't need to remove them .
Note : Selections you play on FM radio stations do not display in your Recent selections .
When you connect a Bluetooth-capable device , the name of the device displays when you choose the Phone source .
When you connect a USB flash drive , Media Player displays the USB source content .
To play the next song in a selected playlist or album , touch the previous or next arrows on the Miniplayer .
Touch Media Player > USB , and then touch the name of the folder that contains the song you want to play .
After you display the contents of a folder on the USB connected flash drive , you can touch any song in the list to play it .
Or use the previous and next arrows in Miniplayer to scroll through your songs .
You can play media from other types of devices ( such 114 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Media and Audio as an iPod ) by connecting to the device using Bluetooth .
Note : Use a USB connection located at the front of the center console .
The USB connections at the rear of the console are for charging only .
Bluetooth® Connected Devices If you have a Bluetooth-capable device such as a phone that is paired and connected to Model 3 ( see Pairing a Bluetooth Phone on page 116 ) , you can play audio files stored on it and you can stream music from it .
Your Bluetooth device begins playing the audio file that is currently active on your device , and Media Player displays the Miniplayer view .
If no audio file is playing on your device , use your device to choose the audio file you want to listen to .
When the file begins to play , you can then use Miniplayer 's next and previous icons to play other tracks .
Audio Settings Press the equalizer icon at the bottom corner of Media Player to access audio settings for tone and balance .
Other settings may be available based on your vehicle features and market region .
For example , if equipped with the premium package , you can turn immersive sound on and off .
To adjust balance , touch Balance and drag the center circle of the cross bars to the location in Model 3 where you want to focus the sound .
Although Bluetooth typically supports wireless communication over distances of up to approximately 30 feet ( 9 meters ) , performance can vary based on the phone you are using .
You must also pair it as described below .
You can pair up to ten Bluetooth phones .
Model 3 always automatically connects to the last phone that was used ( provided it is within range ) .
For example , you can pair an iPod Touch or an iPad or Android tablet to stream music .
Pairing a Bluetooth Phone Pairing allows you to use your Bluetooth- capable phone hands-free to make and receive phone calls , access your contact list , recent calls , etc .
It also allows you to play media files from your phone .
Once a phone is paired , Model 3 can connect to it whenever the phone is within range .
Ensure both the touchscreen and the phone are powered on .
On your phone , enable Bluetooth and ensure it is discoverable .
Note : On some phones , this may require you to go to Bluetooth Settings for the remainder of the procedure .
Touch the Bluetooth icon on the top of the touchscreen .
The touchscreen displays a list of all available Bluetooth devices within operating distance .
On the touchscreen , touch the phone with which you want to pair .
Check that the number displayed on your phone matches the number displayed on the touchscreen .
If prompted on your phone , specify whether you want to allow Model 3 to access your contacts and media files .
When paired , Model 3 automatically connects to the phone , and the touchscreen displays the Bluetooth symbol next to the phone ’ s name to indicate that the connection is active .
Importing Contacts and Recent Calls Once paired , you can use the Bluetooth settings screen ( touch the Bluetooth icon on the touchscreen 's top status bar ) to specify whether you want to allow access to your phone ’ s contacts and recent calls .
If access is turned on , you can use the phone app to display , and make calls to , people in your list of contacts and on your recent calls lists ( see Using the Phone App on page 117 ) .
Note : Before contacts can be imported , you may need to either set your phone to allow syncing , or respond to a popup on your phone to confirm that you want to sync contacts .
This varies depending on the type of phone you are using .
For details , refer to the documentation provided with your phone .
Note : You can turn access to your contacts and recent calls on or off at any time by displaying the Bluetooth settings screen , choosing the phone , and then changing the setting associated with contacts and recent calls .
Unpairing a Bluetooth Phone If you want to disconnect your phone and use it again later , simply touch Disconnect on the Bluetooth settings screen .
If you do not want to use your phone with Model 3 again , touch Forget This Device .
Phone Note : Unpairing the phone has no effect on using the phone as a key .
Connecting to a Paired Phone Model 3 automatically connects with the last phone to which it was connected , provided it is within operating range and has Bluetooth turned on .
If the last phone is not within range , it attempts to connect with the next phone that it has been paired with .
To connect to a different phone , touch the Bluetooth icon on the top of the touchscreen .
Choose the phone you want to connect to , then touch Connect .
If the phone you want to connect to is not listed , you must pair the phone .
When connected , the Model 3 touchscreen displays the Bluetooth symbol next to the phone name to show that the connection is active .
Using the Phone App When your phone is connected to Model 3 using Bluetooth , and you have allowed access to your phone 's contacts ( see Importing Contacts and Recent Calls on page 116 ) , you can use the phone app to display and make a hands-free call to anyone listed on your phone : • Recent Calls list .
The list displays calls in chronological order with the most recent call listed first .
You can display all calls or just those that are missed , incoming , or outgoing .
• Contacts : Contacts are listed in alphabetical order and can be sorted by first name or last name .
You can also choose a letter on the right side of the list to quickly scroll to the names that begin with the selected character .
Using the Touchscreen • Choosing a number from your contact or recent calls list in the phone app .
Note : If it is safe and legal to do so , you can also initiate a call by dialing the number or selecting the contact directly from your phone .
Note : You can also make a phone call by touching a pin on the map and choosing the phone number ( if available ) on the popup window .
Receiving a Phone Call When your phone receives an incoming call , the touchscreen displays the caller ’ s number or name ( if the caller is in your phone ’ s contact list and Model 3 has access to your contacts ) .
Touch one of the options on the touchscreen to Answer or Ignore the call .
Note : Depending on the phone you are using and what speakers you used for your most recent call , your phone may prompt you to choose which speakers you want to use for the incoming call .
Warning : Stay focused on the road at all times while driving .
Using or programming a phone while driving , even with Bluetooth enabled , can result in serious injury or death .
Warning : Follow all applicable laws regarding the use of phones while driving , including , but not limited to , laws that prohibit texting and require hands-free operation at all times .
The Calendar is conveniently integrated with navigation and the Phone app so you can navigate to , or dial into , your next meeting .
The Calendar app requires that : • The Tesla mobile app is running , you are logged in , and the Calendar Sync setting is enabled .
The mobile app can then periodically ( and automatically ) send calendar data from your phone to Model 3 .
Note : To ensure you have access to all features of the Calendar app , it is recommended that you use the most recent version of the mobile app .
You can customize if and when your calendar events are displayed by touching the settings icon located in the top left corner of the Calendar app , then choosing from one of the options available for the Show Calendar Upon Entry setting .
If a calendar event includes an address , a navigation arrow displays to indicate that you can touch the address to navigate to the event 's location .
When an event on your Calendar takes place within the next hour and has a uniquely specified address , the touchscreen notifies you if there is a better route due to traffic , even when you ’ re not currently using navigation .
Touch an event 's information icon to display all notes associated with the event .
If the notes include one or more phone numbers , the information icon shows a phone icon and the calendar displays the first phone number found .
You can also initiate a phone call by touching any number in an event 's notes popup window ( this is especially useful for conference calls ) .
If the notes contain a web link , you can touch the link to open it in the web browser ( if equipped ) .
If events are displayed from multiple calendars , touch the list icon in the top right corner to filter the list of events to show only those from one or more specified calendars .
As you speak , the touchscreen displays an interpretation of your command .
It also displays tips to remind you of the type of commands you can speak .
When you finish speaking the command , tap the voice button again or simply wait .
Note : You can also initiate a voice command by pressing the right scroll button .
To improve voice recognition accuracy , provide multiple cues in your command , such as the artist plus the song ( for example , “ Listen to Yellow Brick Road ” or “ Play Yellow Brick Road by Elton John ” ) .
Using the Touchscreen 119 Security Settings About the Security System If Model 3 does not detect an authenticated phone or the key card and a locked door or trunk is opened , an alarm sounds and the headlights and turn signals flash .
To deactivate the alarm , press any button on the mobile app or tap your key card against the card reader located below the Autopilot camera on the driver 's side door pillar .
When enabled , Model 3 activates its alarm one minute after you exit , the doors lock , and an authenticated phone or key card is no longer detected .
Note : When enabled , in addition to having to enter the 4-digit driving PIN to drive , you must also use it to enter Valet mode for the first time and create the 4-digit valet PIN that you can use to enter and exit Valet mode .
When in Valet mode , Model 3 can be driven without the need for the valet to enter a driving PIN .
In addition , the PIN to Drive setting is disabled whenever Valet mode is active .
If you forget your driving PIN , or to disable PIN to Drive , return to this setting , touch the link to enter your Tesla login credentials , then follow the on-screen prompts .
Note : In the unlikely event that your touchscreen is unresponsive , you may be unable to enter the PIN .
If the touchscreen is still unresponsive , you can still bypass PIN to Drive by enabling Keyless Driving in your mobile app .
Sentry Mode For added security , Sentry Mode continuously monitors your vehicle ’ s surroundings by keeping its cameras and sensors powered on while the vehicle is locked and in Park .
Alternatively , you can enable or disable Sentry Mode with voice commands , your mobile app , or by touching the Sentry Mode icon at the top of your touchscreeen .
Warning : Do not rely on Sentry Mode to protect Model 3 from all possible security threats .
While it may help deter some threats , no security system can prevent all attacks .
Standby , Alert , and Alarm States Model 3 automatically enters the Standby state when you enable Sentry Mode .
If the vehicle detects a threat , such as someone leaning on Model 3 , Sentry Mode switches to the Alert state .
In the Alert state , the touchscreen displays a message indicating that the cameras are recording the event .
Note : When in the Alert state , Sentry Mode saves the last ten minutes of video footage prior to the event that triggered the Alert state , provided that a properly configured USB drive is inserted into one of the USB ports ( see Dashcam on page 65 ) .
In the Alarm state , the security alarm activates , the audio system generates a loud and unexpected sound , and the message on the touchscreen increases to maximum brightness .
Sentry Mode returns from Alarm to Standby after 30 seconds .
120 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Security Settings Location-Based Settings You can customize Sentry Mode to automatically enable near certain locations when the vehicle is parked .
The available settings are : • Exclude Home : Sentry Mode will not activate automatically near the location you set as Home in your Favorites list ( see Recent , Favorite , Home and Work Destinations on page 112 ) .
Note : To set up your Home location , touch Navigate and hold down Home , then enter your address .
• Exclude Work : Sentry Mode will not activate automatically near the location you set as Work in your Favorites .
Set your Work location the same way you set up your Home location , as previously described .
Video and Recordings When using Sentry Mode , it is recommended that you insert a USB flash drive into one of the vehicle 's USB Ports ( see Interior Storage and Electronics on page 20 ) and configure it according to the instructions in Dashcam on page 65 .
In Sentry Mode , the cameras record and save video footage if a security event occurs , but this footage is saved only if a USB flash drive is installed .
The video files are saved on the flash drive with a unique timestamp .
Saved recordings will not be overwritten by new recordings .
To retrieve the footage , unplug the flash drive and use a personal computer to access the video files .
Note : You are responsible for complying with all local laws , regulations , and property restrictions regarding video recordings when using Sentry Mode .
Sentry Mode does not record audio .
Note : Sentry Mode will also send recorded video to Tesla for temporary backup .
Tesla may also use this footage to help enhance detection for Sentry Mode .
You can enable or disable the collection of this video at any time via the `` DATA SHARING '' video clip in Controls > Safety & Security .
Note : Video recording may not be available in certain market regions or in vehicles built before approximately August 1 , 2017 .
Note : Depending on date of manufacture , market region , and options selected at time of purchase , some vehicles are not equipped with a HomeLink Universal Transceiver .
Warning : Do not use the HomeLink Universal Transceiver with a device that does not have safety stop and reverse features .
Using a device without these safety features increases the risk of injury or death .
Park Model 3 so that the front bumper is in front of the garage door , gate , or light you want to program .
Caution : Your device might open or close during programming .
Before programming , make sure that the device is clear of any people or objects .
Tesla recommends replacing the battery in the device 's remote control before Programming HomeLink .
Touch the HomeLink icon on the top of the touchscreen .
Touch Create HomeLink , then use the keyboard on your touchscreen to enter a name for your HomeLink device .
Touch Enter on the keyboard or touch Create HomeLink .
Touch Start then follow the onscreen instructions .
After pressing the Learn/Program/ Smart button on the device 's remote , you only have approximately 30 seconds to return to your vehicle , press Continue , and then press the trained HomeLink device name twice .
Consider having an assistant help with this step .
Once your device is programmed , touch Save to complete the HomeLink programming routine .
In some cases the programming process may require multiple attempts before succeeding .
Once programmed , you can operate the device by touching its corresponding HomeLink icon on the touchscreen 's status bar .
HomeLink remembers the location of your programmed devices .
When you approach a known location , the HomeLink control on the touchscreen automatically drops down .
Auto Opening and Closing To operate a HomeLink device without touching the touchscreen , you can automate the device to open as you approach and close as you drive away : 1 .
Touch the HomeLink icon on the top of the touchscreen and choose the device you want to automate .
Select the Auto-open when arriving checkbox if you want the device to open as you approach .
Touch the arrows to specify the distance you want your vehicle to be from the device before it opens .
Select the Auto-close when leaving checkbox if you want the device to close as you drive away .
As you approach ( or drive away from ) a device that is set to operate automatically , the HomeLink status icon displays a count-down message to let you know when the device will automatically open/close .
In situations where you do n't want the device to automatically open or close , touch Skip Auto-Open or Skip Auto-Close at any time during the count-down message .
122 Model 3 Owner 's Manual HomeLink® Universal Transceiver Resetting the Location of the HomeLink Device If you experience situations in which you sometimes drive up to your HomeLink device and it does n't open , or the HomeLink icon on the touchscreen 's status bar does not display the dropdown when you approach the device , you may need to reset the device 's location .
and display the HomeLink settings page by touching the HomeLink icon on the top of the touchscreen .
Touch the name of the device you want to reset , then Reset Location .
Deleting a Device To delete a HomeLink device , touch the HomeLink icon on the top of the touchscreen .
Touch the name of the device you want to delete , then touch Delete .
The touchscreen instructs you to stand in front of the vehicle , point the remote at the front bumper and press and hold the button until the headlights flash .
When the headlights flash , Model 3 has learned the remote and you can touch Continue on the touchscreen .
If the headlights do not flash , refer to the guidelines in Headlights do not flash on page 123 .
The touchscreen instructs you to press the LEARN button on the device 's receiver .
If training the receiver does not work , refer to the guidelines in After programming , the device does not work on page 123 .
If you have an old device that is not equipped with a `` rolling code '' remote , the device does not need to learn Model 3 and you can skip this part of the process .
Headlights do not flash • Check the batteries in the remote .
It is a good idea to replace the batteries before you start programming .
• Standing in front of the vehicle , press and hold the button on your device 's remote with the remote approximately 2 inches ( 5 cm ) in front of the Tesla emblem .
In some cases you must hold the button on the remote for up to three minutes .
After pressing the Learn/Program/ Smart button on the device 's remote , you only have approximately 30 seconds to return to your vehicle , press Continue , and then press the trained HomeLink device name twice .
Consider having an assistant help with this step .
• Canada only : certain garage door remotes may require multiple short remote presses ( approximately 1 second for each press ) instead of one long duration press .
that you are trying to program .
For instructions on how to put the receiver into learning mode , refer to the owner documentation provided with the garage door , gate , etc .
that you are trying to program .
Connecting to Wi-Fi Wi-Fi is available as a data connection method and is often faster than cellular data networks .
Connecting to Wi-Fi is especially useful in areas with limited or no cellular connectivity .
To ensure fast , reliable delivery of software and map updates , Tesla recommends leaving your vehicle connected to a Wi-Fi network whenever possible ( for example , if parked in your garage overnight ) .
Model 3 will start scanning and display the detected Wi-Fi networks that are within range .
Your vehicle connects to the Wi-Fi network and will automatically connect to it whenever the network is within range .
You can also connect to a hidden network that is n't shown on the list of scanned networks .
Just touch Wi-Fi Settings , enter the name of the network in the resulting dialog box , select the security setting , then touch Add Network .
Note : If more than one previously connected network is within range , Model 3 connects to the one most recently used .
Using the Touchscreen 125 Software Updates Loading New Software Model 3 updates its software wirelessly , providing new features throughout your term of ownership .
Tesla recommends that you install software updates as soon as they are available .
The first time you enter Model 3 after an update is made available , a scheduling window displays on the touchscreen .
The scheduling window displays again at the end of your first driving session .
Note : Some software updates can take up to three hours to complete .
Model 3 must be in Park while the new software is being installed .
To ensure the fastest and most reliable delivery of software updates , leave the Wi-Fi turned on and connected whenever possible ( see Connecting to Wi-Fi on page 125 ) .
Note : Software updates using cellular data are also available if your vehicle is equipped with premium connectivity .
Warning : Do not attempt to use the vehicle while the software is being updated .
Vehicle functions , including some safety systems , may be limited or disabled while a software update is in progress and you could damage the vehicle .
Touch this clock icon to display the update window .
You can then either : • Schedule the update by setting the time you want the update to begin .
Then touch Set For This Time .
You can reschedule the update any time before it begins .
OR • Touch Install Now to immediately start the update process .
You can also view the release notes of your current software version .
Charging resumes automatically when the software update is complete .
If you are driving Model 3 at the scheduled update time , the update is canceled and you need to reschedule it .
Note : Software updates are not performed when Keep Climate On is active .
Note : You can also start software updates using your Tesla mobile app .
Note : Over time , the touchscreen may display a software update window informing you to SET FOR THIS TIME or INSTALL NOW .
This software update window will persist until you complete the installation of the software update .
You must install all software updates as soon as they are available and any harm relating to the failure to install a software update will not be covered by the vehicle ’ s warranty .
Failure or refusal to install such updates may result in the inaccessibility of certain vehicle features ( including incompatibility with digital media devices ) or in Tesla being unable to diagnose and service your vehicle .
Note : If software updates are not installed , some vehicle features may become inaccessible and digital media devices may become incompatible .
If the touchscreen displays a message indicating that a software update was not successfully completed , contact Tesla .
Viewing Release Notes When a software update is complete , learn about the new features by reading the release notes .
To display release notes about your current software version at any time touch the Tesla “ T ” at the top center of the touchscreen , then touch Release Notes .
Tesla strongly recommends reading all release notes .
They may contain important safety information or operating instructions regarding your Model 3 .
Charge Port Warning : The high voltage system has no user serviceable parts .
Do not disassemble , remove or replace high voltage components , cables or connectors .
High voltage cables are typically colored orange for easy identification .
Warning : Read and follow all instructions provided on the labels that are attached to Model 3 .
These labels are there for your safety .
Warning : In the unlikely event that a fire occurs , immediately contact your local fire emergency responders .
Charging 127 Electric Vehicle Components Charging Equipment Charging equipment designed specifically to charge your Model 3 is available from Tesla .
When using the Mobile Connector , first plug the Mobile Connector into the power outlet , and then plug in Model 3 .
Additional adapters can be purchased from Tesla .
Tesla offers additional adapters ( for example , J1772 and CHAdeMO ) to allow you to plug into the most commonly used public charging stations in your region .
For information on the charging equipment available for your region , go to www.tesla.com , choose your region , and then view the available charging options .
128 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Battery Information About the Battery Model 3 has one of the most sophisticated battery systems in the world .
The most important way to preserve the Battery is to LEAVE YOUR VEHICLE PLUGGED IN when you are not using it .
This is particularly important if you are not planning to drive Model 3 for several weeks .
When plugged in , Model 3 wakes up when needed to automatically maintain a charge level that maximizes the lifetime of the Battery .
Note : When left idle and unplugged , your vehicle periodically uses energy from the Battery for system tests and recharging the 12V battery when necessary .
There is no advantage to waiting until the Battery ’ s level is low before charging .
In fact , the Battery performs best when charged regularly .
Note : If the Model 3 Battery becomes completely discharged in a situation in which transporting the vehicle is required , the owner is responsible for transporting expenses .
Discharge-related transporting expenses are not covered under the Roadside Assistance policy .
The peak charging rate of the Battery may decrease slightly after a large number of DC Fast Charging sessions , such as those at Superchargers .
To ensure maximum driving range and Battery safety , the Battery charge rate is decreased when the Battery is too cold , when the Battery ’ s charge is nearly full , and when the Battery conditions change with usage and age .
These changes in the condition of the Battery are driven by battery physics and may increase the total Supercharging duration by a few minutes over time .
Battery Care Never allow the Battery to fully discharge .
Even when Model 3 is not being driven , its Battery discharges very slowly to power the onboard electronics .
The Battery can discharge at a rate of approximately 1 % per day , though the discharge rate may vary depending on environmental factors ( such as cold weather ) , vehicle configuration , and your selected settings on the touchscreen .
Situations can arise in which you must leave Model 3 unplugged for an extended period of time ( for example , at an airport when traveling ) .
In these situations , keep the 1 % in mind to ensure that you leave the Battery with a sufficient charge level .
In this mode , the Battery stops supporting the onboard electronics and auxiliary 12V battery .
Battery Warnings and Cautions Warning : The Battery has no parts that an owner or a non-Tesla authorized service technician can service .
Under no circumstances should you open or tamper with the Battery .
Always contact Tesla to arrange for Battery servicing .
If you leave it unplugged for an extended period , it may not be possible to charge or use Model 3 without jump starting or replacing the 12V battery ( see Instructions for Transporters on page 173 for instructions on how to jump start the battery ) .
Leaving Model 3 unplugged for an extended period can Charging 129 Battery Information also result in permanent Battery damage .
Do not remove the coolant filler cap and do not add fluid .
If the touchscreen warns you that the fluid level is low , contact Tesla immediately .
130 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Charging Instructions Opening the Charge Port The charge port is located on the left side of Model 3 , behind a door that is part of the rear tail light assembly .
Before charging , park Model 3 to ensure that the charge cable easily reaches the charge port .
With Model 3 unlocked ( or an authenticated phone is within range ) and in Park , press and release the button on the Tesla charge cable to open the charge port door .
You can also open the charge port door using any of these methods : • On the touchscreen , use the app launcher to open the Charging app , then touch Open Charge Port .
• Press the bottom of the charge port door when Model 3 is unlocked or an authenticated phone is nearby .
Note : The following image is provided for demonstration purposes only .
Depending on market region , your charge port may be slightly different .
If you do not insert a charge cable into the charge port within a few minutes after opening the charge port door , the charge port door closes .
If this happens , use the touchscreen to open the charge port door again Caution : Do not try to force the charge port door open .
Plugging In If desired , use the touchscreen to change the charge limit and the charging current ( see Charging Status and Settings on page 133 ) .
Depending on the charging equipment you are using , you may need to start and stop charging using a control on the charging equipment .
If you are using the Mobile Connector , plug it into the power outlet before plugging it into Model 3 .
Align the connector to the charge port and insert fully .
If the Battery requires heating or cooling , you may notice a delay before charging begins .
Note : Whenever Model 3 is plugged in but not actively charging , it draws energy from the wall outlet instead of using energy stored in the Battery .
For example , if you are sitting in Charging 131 Charging Instructions Model 3 and using the touchscreen while parked and plugged in , Model 3 draws energy from the wall outlet instead of the Battery .
Caution : The connector end of the charge cable can damage the paint if dropped onto the vehicle .
The frequency at which the charge port light pulses slows down as the charge level approaches full .
When charging is complete , the light stops pulsing and is solid green .
If the charge port light turns red while charging , a fault is detected .
Note : When charging , particularly at high currents , the refrigerant compressor and fan operate as needed to keep the Battery cool .
Therefore , it is normal to hear sounds during charging .
Note : Air conditioning performance is generally not affected by charging .
However , under certain circumstances ( for example , you are charging at high currents during a particularly warm day ) , the air coming from the vents may not be as cool as expected and a message displays on the touchscreen .
This is normal behavior and ensures that the Battery stays within an optimum temperature range while charging to support longevity and optimum performance .
Failure to follow these instructions can result in serious injury or damage to the vehicle , charging equipment , or property .
Stopping Charging Stop charging at any time by disconnecting the charge cable or touching Stop Charging on the touchscreen .
Note : To prevent unauthorized unplugging of the charge cable , the charge cable latch remains locked and Model 3 must be unlocked or able to recognize your authenticated phone before you can disconnect the charge cable .
Press and hold the button on the connector handle to release the latch .
These methods unlock the charge port as well .
Pull the connector from the charge port .
Note : The charge port automatically closes within approximately 10 seconds of removing the connector from the charge port .
Caution : Tesla strongly recommends leaving Model 3 plugged in when not in use .
This maintains the Battery at the optimum level of charge .
Manually Releasing Charge Cable If the usual methods for releasing a charge cable from the charge port ( using the charge handle release button , touchscreen , or mobile app ) do not work , carefully follow these steps : 1 .
Ensure that Model 3 is not actively charging by displaying the charging screen on the touchscreen .
Pull the charge port 's release cable downwards to unlatch the charge cable .
Note : The release cable may be recessed within the opening of the trim .
Pull the charge cable from the charge port .
Charging Instructions Caution : The release cable is designed for use only in situations where the charge cable can not be released from the charge port using the usual methods .
Continuous use may result in damage to the release cable or charging equipment .
Warning : Do not perform this procedure while your vehicle is charging or if any orange high voltage conductors are exposed .
Failure to follow these instructions can result in electric shock and serious injury or damage to the vehicle .
If you have any uncertainty as to how to safely perform this procedure , contact Tesla .
Warning : Do not attempt to remove the charge cable while simultaneously pulling the release cable .
Always pull the release cable before attempting to remove the charge cable from the charge port .
Failure to follow these instructions can result in electric shock and serious injury .
Model 3 is ready to charge and the connector is not inserted , or the charge port latch is unlocked and the connector is ready to be removed .
In these situations , the charge port light is white .
Realign the connector to the charge port and insert fully .
Charging Status and Settings The charging screen displays on the touchscreen whenever the charge port door is open .
To display the charging screen at any time : Touch the charging icon on the `` Cards '' area on the touchscreen .
The charging screen displays a representative image of the status of the Battery and information about your charging session including : • Charging rate ( in kilowatt hours , miles per hour , or kilometers per hour , depending on your display setting ) .
• Added energy or estimated increase in driving distance achieved so far in this charging session ( in kilowatt hours , miles per hour , or kilometers per hour , depending on your display setting ) .
Note : The following illustration is provided for demonstration purposes only and may vary slightly depending on software version and market region .
While charging , the estimated time remaining to achieve your set limit is also displayed .
Adjust the charge limit by touching Set Limit , and drag the arrow to move the charge limit setting .
The setting you choose applies to immediate and scheduled charging sessions .
The current automatically sets to the maximum current available from the attached charge cable , unless it was previously reduced to a lower level .
If needed , touch - or + to change the current ( for example , you may want to reduce the current if you are concerned about overloading a domestic wiring circuit shared by other equipment ) .
It is not possible to set the charging current to a level that exceeds the maximum available from the attached charge cable .
If you charge at the same location , you do not need to change it again .
This automatic current reduction increases robustness and safety in situations when an external problem exists ( for example , a home wiring system , receptacle , adapter or cord is unable to meet its rated current capacity ) .
Although you can manually increase it , Tesla recommends charging at the lower current until the underlying problem is resolved and the charging location can provide consistent power .
Touch to open the charge port door or to start ( or stop ) charging .
Displays the total estimated driving distance or energy percentage ( depending on your display setting ) available .
Shows if the charge cable is locked in the charge port or not .
If Model 3 is not charging , you can touch the lock icon to unlock the charge cable from the charge port .
Charging rate per hour , estimated increase in driving distance ( or energy ) achieved so far in this charging session , current supplied/available from the connected power supply , and voltage supplied by the charge cable .
When you set a scheduled charging time , Model 3 displays the set time when you are parked at the scheduled location .
If , at the scheduled time , Model 3 is not plugged in at the location , charging starts as soon as you plug it in , provided you plug it in within six hours of the scheduled time .
If plugged in after six hours , charging does not start until the scheduled time on the next day .
Note : If charging at a Tesla Supercharger , the charging screen also displays information about your previous or current Supercharger session ( see Supercharger Usage Fees and Idle Fees on page 134 ) .
You can manually increase the limit by tapping “ Set Limit ” on the touchscreen or mobile app .
Supercharger Usage Fees and Idle Fees When charging using a Tesla supercharger , SUPERCHARGING information displays at the bottom of the charging screen .
This information includes the location , the time that charging started , and an estimate of how much the session will cost .
When you stop supercharging , the estimated cost of that session displays until a new supercharging session begins .
Note : Estimated pricing is displayed for your convenience only and may not reflect the actual final price you will be charged for that supercharging session .
Final pricing for supercharging sessions can be found in your Tesla Account .
Charging Instructions When charging at a Tesla supercharger , you are subject to idle fees .
Idle fees are designed to encourage drivers to move their vehicle from the Supercharger when charging is complete .
Idle fees are in effect only when half of the Superchargers at a site are occupied .
The Tesla mobile app notifies you when charging nears completion , and again when charging is complete .
Additional notifications are sent if idle fees are incurred .
Idle fees are waived if you move your vehicle within five minutes of charging completion .
Log into your Tesla Account to view fees and details about Supercharger sessions , set up a payment method , and make payments .
Once a payment method is saved , fees are automatically paid from your account .
Charging 135 Maintenance Schedule Service Intervals Your vehicle should generally be serviced on an as-needed basis .
However , Tesla recommends the following maintenance items and intervals , as applicable to your vehicle , to ensure continued reliability and efficiency of your Model 3 .
Additionally , the above list should not be considered comprehensive and does not include consumable parts such as windshield wipers , brake pads , etc .
Note : Damages or failures caused by maintenance or repairs performed by non- Tesla certified technicians are not covered by the warranty .
• Check for any unexpected indicator lights or vehicle alerts on the touchscreen .
Warning : Contact Tesla immediately if you notice any significant or sudden drop in fluid levels or uneven tire wear .
Fluid Replacement Intervals Your Battery coolant does not need to be replaced for the life of your vehicle under most circumstances .
Note : Any damage caused by opening the Battery coolant reservoir is excluded from the warranty .
High Voltage Safety Your Model 3 has been designed and built with safety as a priority .
However , be aware of these precautions to protect yourself from the risk of injury inherent in all high-voltage systems : • • • • Read and follow all instructions provided on the labels that are attached to Model 3 .
These labels are there for your safety .
Do not disassemble , remove or replace high voltage components , cables or connectors .
High voltage cables are colored orange for easy identification .
In the unlikely event that a fire occurs , immediately contact your local fire emergency responders .
Warning : Always disconnect the charge cable before working underneath Model 3 , even if charging is not in progress .
Warning : Keep your hands and clothing away from cooling fans .
used in vehicles are poisonous and should not be inhaled , swallowed , or brought into contact with open wounds .
For your safety , always read and follow instructions printed on fluid containers .
Maintenance 137 Tire Care and Maintenance Maintaining Tire Pressures Keep tires inflated to the pressures shown on the Tire and Loading Information label , even if it differs from the pressure printed on the tire itself .
The Tire and Loading Information label is located on the center door pillar and is visible when the front door is open .
Note : If your Model 3 is fitted with Tesla accessory wheels or tires , some information may be different from the labels on the vehicle .
See Accessory Wheels and Tires on page 152. cause a tire to overheat , resulting in severe tire cracking , tread separation , or blowout , which causes unexpected loss of vehicle control and increased risk of injury .
Warning : Check tire pressures using an accurate pressure gauge when tires are cold .
It takes only about one mile ( 1.6 km ) of driving to warm up the tires sufficiently to affect tire pressures .
Parking the vehicle in direct sunlight or in hot weather can also affect tire pressures .
If you must check warm tires , expect increased pressures .
Do not let air out of warm tires in an attempt to match recommended cold tire pressures .
A hot tire at or below the recommended cold tire inflation pressure is dangerously under-inflated .
Warning : Do not use any tire sealant other than the type provided in a Tesla tire repair kit .
Other types can cause tire pressure sensors to malfunction .
If your Model 3 did not include a tire repair kit , you can purchase one from Tesla .
The Tire Pressure indicator light on the touchscreen alerts you if one or more tires is under- or over-inflated .
The Tire Pressure indicator light does not immediately turn off when you adjust tire pressure .
If the indicator light flashes for one minute whenever you power on Model 3 , a fault with the TPMS is detected ( see TPMS Malfunction on page 142 ) .
Note : Display tire pressures in the `` Cards '' area , located toward the bottom on the left side of the touchscreen , as described in Touchscreen Overview on page 4 .
You can also choose whether you want to display tire pressures using BAR or PSI by touching Controls > Display > Tire Pressure .
Warning : Under-inflation is the most common cause of tire failures and can 138 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Tire Care and Maintenance Checking and Adjusting Tire Pressures Follow these steps when tires are cold and Model 3 has been stationary for over three hours : 1 .
Refer to the Tire and Loading Information label located on the driver ’ s center door pillar for the target tire pressure .
Firmly press an accurate tire pressure gauge onto the valve to measure pressure .
If required , add or remove air to reach the recommended pressure .
Note : You can release air by pressing the metal stem in the center of the valve .
Reinstall the valve cap to prevent dirt from entering .
Periodically check the valve for damage and leaks .
Inspecting and Maintaining Tires Regularly inspect the tread and side walls for any sign of distortion ( bulges ) , foreign objects , cuts or wear .
Check tires regularly for wear , and ensure there are no cuts , bulges or exposure of the ply/ cord structure .
Tire Wear Adequate tread depth is important for proper tire performance .
Tires with a tread depth less than 5/32 ” ( 4 mm ) do not perform well in snow and slush and should not be used when driving in winter conditions .
Model 3 is originally fitted with tires that have wear indicators molded into the tread pattern .
When the tread has been worn down to 4/32 ” ( 3 mm ) , the indicators start to appear at the surface of the tread pattern , producing the effect of a continuous band of rubber across the width of the tire .
For optimal performance and safety , Tesla recommends replacing tires before the wear indicators are visible .
Unbalanced wheels ( sometimes noticeable as vibration through the steering wheel ) affect vehicle handling and tire life .
Even with regular use , wheels can get out of balance .
If tire wear is uneven ( on one side of the tire only ) or becomes abnormally excessive , check the alignment of wheels .
Note : When replacing only two tires , always install the new tires on the rear .
Maintenance 139 Tire Care and Maintenance Punctured Tires A puncture eventually causes the tire to lose pressure , which is why it is important to check tire pressures frequently .
Permanently repair or replace punctured or damaged tires as soon as possible .
Your tubeless tires may not leak when penetrated , provided the object remains in the tire .
Drive slowly , while avoiding heavy braking or sharp steering and , when safe to do so , stop the vehicle .
This allows you to slowly drive Model 3 to Tesla or to a nearby tire repair facility .
Warning : Do not drive with a punctured tire , even if the puncture has not caused the tire to deflate .
Flat Spots If Model 3 is stationary for a long period in high temperatures , tires can form flat spots .
When Model 3 is driven , these flat spots cause a vibration which gradually disappears as the tires warm up and regain their original shape .
To minimize flat spots during storage , inflate tires to the maximum pressure indicated on the tire wall .
Then , before driving , release air to adjust tire pressure to the recommended levels .
Improving Tire Mileage To improve the mileage you get from your tires , maintain tires at the recommended tire pressures , observe speed limits and advisory speeds , and avoid : • Pulling away quickly , or hard acceleration .
Replacing Tires and Wheels Tires degrade over time due to the effects of ultraviolet light , extreme temperatures , high loads , and environmental conditions .
It is recommended that tires are replaced every six years , or sooner if required .
Wheel and tires are matched to suit the handling characteristics of the vehicle .
Replacement tires must comply with the original specification .
If tires other than those specified are used , ensure that the load and speed ratings marked on the tire ( see Understanding Tire Markings on page 166 ) equal or exceed those of the original specification .
Ideally , you should replace all four tires at the same time .
If this is not possible , replace the tires in pairs , placing the new tires on the rear .
If you replace a wheel , the TPMS ( Tire Pressure Monitoring System ) sensors need to be reset to ensure they provide accurate warnings when tires are under- or over-inflated ( see Automatic Reset of TPMS Sensors on page 142 ) .
For the specification of the original wheels and tires installed on Model 3 , see Wheels and Tires on page 164 .
Warning : For your safety , use only tires and wheels that match the original specification .
Tires that do not match the original specification can affect the operation of the TPMS .
The speed rating is shown on the sidewall of your tires ( see Understanding Tire Markings on page 166 ) .
Asymmetric Tires Model 3 tires are asymmetric and must be mounted on the wheel with the correct sidewall facing outward .
The sidewall of the tire is marked with the word OUTSIDE .
When new tires are installed , make sure that the tires are correctly mounted on the wheels .
140 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Tire Care and Maintenance Warning : Road holding is seriously impaired if the tires are incorrectly installed on the wheels .
Removing and Installing Aero Covers If your Model 3 is equipped with aero covers , you must remove them to access the lug nuts .
Grasp the aero cover firmly with both hands .
Pull the aero cover toward you to release the retaining clips .
Removing and Installing Lug Nut Covers If your Model 3 is equipped with lug nut covers , you must remove them to access the lug nuts .
Insert the curved part of the lug nut cover tool ( located in your glovebox ) into the hole at the base of the Tesla `` T '' .
Align the aero cover into position so that the notch at the base of the Tesla `` T '' is aligned with the tire 's valve stem .
Maneuver the lug nut cover tool so that it is fully inserted into the hole in the lug nut cover .
Twist the lug nut cover tool so that the curved part is touching the middle of the lug nut cover .
Firmly pull the lug nut tool away from the wheel until the lug nut cover is released .
Push firmly around the perimeter of the aero cover until it fully snaps into place .
Align the lug nut cover into position .
Push firmly on the lug nut cover until it fully snaps into place .
Tire Care and Maintenance Tire Pressure Monitoring Each tire should be checked monthly when cold and inflated to the recommended pressures that are printed on the Tire and Loading Information label located on the driver ’ s door pillar ( see Maintaining Tire Pressures on page 138 ) .
If your vehicle has tires of a different size than the size indicated on the vehicle placard or tire inflation pressure label , determine the proper tire inflation pressure for those tires .
As an added safety feature , your vehicle has been equipped with a TPMS that displays a tire pressure telltale ( Tire Pressure Warning ) on the touchscreen when one or more of your tires is significantly under- or over-inflated .
Accordingly , when the Tire Pressure indicator light displays on the touchscreen to alert you about tire pressure , stop and check your tires as soon as possible , and inflate them to the proper pressure ( see Maintaining Tire Pressures on page 138 ) .
Driving on a significantly under-inflated tire causes the tire to overheat and can lead to tire failure .
Under- inflation also reduces range efficiency and tire tread life , and may affect the vehicle 's handling and stopping ability .
If Model 3 detects a fault with the TPMS , this indicator flashes for one minute whenever you power on Model 3 .
Note : Installing accessories that are not approved by Tesla can interfere with the TPMS .
Warning : The TPMS is not a substitute for proper tire maintenance , including manually checking tire pressures and regularly inspecting the condition of tires .
It is the driver 's responsibility to maintain correct tire pressure , even if under- or over-inflation has not reached the level for the TPMS to trigger the Tire Pressure Warning on the touchscreen .
Automatic Reset of TPMS Sensors After replacing one or more wheels ( but not after replacing a tire or rotating wheels ) , the TPMS sensors are reset to ensure tire pressure warnings are accurate .
Manually Resetting TPMS Sensors To accommodate aftermarket tires and specific off-highway driving situations ( such as track events ) , you can reset the TPMS sensors to trigger an alert based on the currently set tire pressure instead of the default factory tire pressure .
To do so , touch Service > Reset TPMS Sensors and follow the onscreen instructions .
Note : Resetting TPMS sensors may be especially helpful when using Track Mode , but remember to restore the factory TPMS setting when returning to normal driving .
Warning : If your Model 3 is equipped with aftermarket tires that differ in size from those printed on the Tire and Loading Information Label ( see Vehicle Loading on page 157 ) , it is the driver 's responsibility to determine the correct tire pressure .
Do not drive on public roads when tires are not inflated to the correct pressure .
Warning : Do not depend on TPMS sensors to accurately determine pressures and trigger alerts .
Over or under-inflated tires can result in loss of control or tire damage , which can lead to serious injury .
Replacing a Tire Sensor If the Tire Pressure warning indicator displays frequently , contact Tesla to determine if a tire sensor needs to be replaced .
If a non-Tesla Service Center repairs or replaces a tire , the tire sensor may not work until Tesla performs the setup procedure .
TPMS Malfunction Model 3 has also been equipped with a TPMS malfunction indicator to indicate when the system is not operating properly .
142 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Tire Care and Maintenance The TPMS malfunction indicator is combined with the tire pressure indicator light .
When the system detects a malfunction , the indicator flashes for approximately one minute after Model 3 powers on , and then remains continuously lit .
This sequence continues upon subsequent vehicle start-ups as long as the malfunction exists .
When the TPMS malfunction indicator is on , the system might not be able to detect or signal under- and over-inflated tires as intended .
TPMS malfunctions can occur for a variety of reasons , including installing replacement or alternate tires or wheels that prevent the TPMS from functioning properly .
Always check the TPMS malfunction indicator light after replacing one or more tires or wheels on your vehicle to ensure that the replacement tires or wheels allow the TPMS to continue to function properly .
Note : If a tire has been replaced or repaired using a different tire sealant than the one available from Tesla , and a low tire pressure is detected , it is possible that the tire sensor has been damaged .
Contact Tesla to have the fault repaired as soon as possible .
Seasonal Tire Types Summer Tires Your vehicle may be originally equipped with high performance summer tires or all season tires .
Tesla recommends using winter tires if driving in cold temperatures or on roads where snow or ice may be present .
Contact Tesla for winter tire recommendations .
Warning : In cold temperatures or on snow or ice , summer tires do not provide adequate traction .
Selecting and installing the appropriate tires for winter conditions is important to ensure the safety and optimum performance of your Model 3 .
These tires are designed to provide adequate traction in most conditions year-round , but may not provide the same level of traction as winter tires in snowy or icy conditions .
Winter Tires Use winter tires to increase traction in snowy or icy conditions .
When installing winter tires , always install a complete set of four tires at the same time .
Winter tires must be the same size , brand , construction and tread pattern on all four wheels .
Contact Tesla for winter tire recommendations .
When driving with winter tires , you may experience more road noise , shorter tread life , and less traction on dry roads .
Note : Installing winter tires with aggressive compound and tread design may result in temporarily-reduced regenerative braking power .
However , your vehicle is designed to recalibrate itself to restore regenerative braking power after a short period of normal driving .
Maintenance 143 Tire Care and Maintenance Driving in Low Temperatures Tire performance is reduced in low ambient temperatures , resulting in reduced grip and an increased susceptibility to damage from impacts .
Performance tires can temporarily harden when cold , causing you to hear rotational noise for the first few miles ( kilometers ) until the tires warm up .
Using Tire Chains Tesla has tested and approved the following tire chains to increase traction in snowy conditions .
Tire chains should only be installed on the rear tires .
Failure to do so can cause damage not covered by the warranty .
When installing tire chains , follow the instructions and warnings provided by the tire chain manufacturer .
Mount them evenly and as tight as possible .
When using tire chains : • Inspect the tire chains for loose fittings and damaged links before each use .
• Do not drive the vehicle without the chains properly installed .
• Remove the tire chains as soon as conditions allow .
Check local laws before installing tire chains .
Damage caused by using non-recommended tire chains , or incorrectly installing tire chains , is not covered by the warranty .
Caution : Do not use tire chains on the front tires .
Caution : Never deflate your tires to put on tire chains .
Caution : Ensure that the tire chains can not touch suspension components or brake lines .
If you hear the chains making unusual noises that would indicate contact with Model 3 , stop and investigate immediately .
If necessary , use denatured alcohol to remove tar spots and stubborn grease stains , then immediately wash the area with water and a mild , non- detergent soap to remove the alcohol .
Rinse Thoroughly Before washing , flush grime and grit from the vehicle using a hose .
Flush away accumulations of mud in areas where debris easily collects ( such as wheel wells and panel seams ) .
If salt has been used on the highways ( such as during winter months ) , thoroughly rinse all traces of road salt from the underside of the vehicle , wheel wells , and brakes .
Rinse with Clean Water After washing , rinse with clean water to prevent soap from drying on the surfaces .
Dry Thoroughly and Clean Exterior Glass After washing and rinsing , dry thoroughly with a chamois .
If necessary , dry the brakes by going on a short drive and applying the brakes multiple times .
Clean windows and mirrors using an automotive glass cleaner .
Do not scrape , or use any abrasive cleaning fluid on glass or mirrored surfaces .
Cautions for Exterior Cleaning Caution : Do not use windshield treatment fluids .
Doing so can interfere with wiper friction and cause a chattering sound .
Keep the nozzle moving and do not concentrate the water jet on any one area .
Caution : Do not aim water hoses at electronic modules or exposed cabling .
Caution : To avoid corrosive damage that may not be covered by the warranty , rinse away any road salt from the underside of the vehicle , wheel wells , and brakes .
After cleaning the vehicle , dry the brakes by going on a short drive and applying the brakes multiple times .
Caution : If washing in an automatic car wash , use Touchless car washes only .
Using any other type of car wash could cause damage that is not covered by the warranty .
Caution : Ensure the wipers are off before washing Model 3 to avoid the risk of damaging the wipers .
These can damage the finish on the wheels .
Caution : Avoid using a high pressure power washer on the camera ( s ) or parking sensors ( if equipped ) and do not clean a sensor or camera lens with a sharp or abrasive object that can scratch or damage its surface .
Failure to follow these instructions can result in serious injury or damage to the vehicle , charging equipment , or property .
Maintenance 145 Cleaning Cleaning the Interior Frequently inspect and clean the interior to maintain its appearance and to prevent premature wear .
If possible , immediately wipe up spills and remove marks .
Interior Glass Do not scrape , or use any abrasive cleaning fluid on glass or mirrored surfaces .
This can damage the reflective surface of the mirror and the heating elements in the rear window .
Airbags Do not allow any substance to enter an airbag cover .
Dashboard and Plastic Surfaces Do not polish the upper surfaces of the dashboard .
Polished surfaces are reflective and could interfere with your driving view .
Polyurethane Seats Wipe spills as soon as possible using a soft cloth moistened with warm water and non- detergent soap .
Cloth Seats Wipe spills as soon as possible using a soft cloth moistened with warm water and non- detergent soap .
Vacuum the seats as needed to remove any loose dirt .
Seat Belts Extend the belts to wipe .
Do not use any type of detergent or chemical cleaning agent .
Allow the belts to dry naturally while extended , preferably away from direct sunlight .
Touchscreen Clean the touchscreen using a soft lint-free cloth specifically designed to clean monitors and displays .
To wipe the touchscreen without activating buttons and changing settings , you can enable clean mode .
The display darkens to make it easy to see dust and smudges .
Chrome and Metal Surfaces Polish , abrasive cleaners or hard cloths can damage the finish on chrome and metal surfaces .
Warning : If you notice any damage on an airbag or seat belt , contact Tesla immediately .
Warning : Exposure to chemical cleaners can be hazardous and can irritate eyes and skin .
Read and observe the instructions provided by the manufacturer of the chemical cleaner .
Polishing , Touch Up , and Body Repair To preserve the cosmetic appearance of the body , you can occasionally treat the paint surfaces with an approved polish containing : 146 Model 3 Owner 's Manual • • • Very mild abrasive to remove surface contamination without removing or damaging the paint .
Filling compounds that fill scratches and reduce their visibility .
Wax to provide a protective coating between the paint and environmental elements .
Cleaning Regularly inspect the exterior paint for damage .
Use the touch-up pen after washing but before polishing or waxing .
Body repairs should be performed only by a Tesla approved body shop .
These can scour the surface and permanently damage the paint .
Caution : Do not use chrome polish or other abrasive cleaners .
Using a Car Cover To preserve the cosmetic appearance of the body when Model 3 is not being used , use a genuine Tesla car cover .
Car covers can be purchased from Tesla .
Using a non-Tesla car cover can prevent the Battery from being adequately cooled during charging .
Floor Mats To extend the life of your carpet and make them easier to clean , use genuine Tesla floor mats ( see Parts and Accessories on page 152 ) .
Maintain floor mats by regularly cleaning them and checking that they are properly attached .
Replace floor mats if they become excessively worn .
Warning : To avoid potential interference with a foot pedal , ensure that the driver ’ s floor mat is securely fastened , and never place an additional floor mat on top of it .
Floor mats should always rest on top of the vehicle carpeting surface and not on another floor mat or other covering .
Maintenance 147 Wiper Blades and Washer Jets Checking and Cleaning Wiper Blades Periodically clean the edge of the wiper blades and check the rubber for cracks , splits , and roughness .
If damaged , replace the blade immediately to prevent damage to the glass .
Contaminants on the windshield , or on the wiper blades , can reduce the effectiveness of the wipers .
Follow these guidelines for cleaning : • Clean the windshield and wiper blades using washer fluid , isopropyl ( rubbing ) alcohol , or non-abrasive glass cleaner approved for use on automotive glass and rubber .
Inappropriate products can cause damage or smears , and create glare on the windshield .
• Lift the wiper arm a short distance away from the windshield , just far enough to access the wiper blade .
Do not lift a wiper arm beyond its intended position .
If the wipers remain ineffective after cleaning , replace the wiper blades .
Replacing Wiper Blades For optimum performance , replace the wiper blades at least once a year .
Note : Only install replacement blades that are identical to the original blades .
Using inappropriate blades can damage the wiper system and windshield .
Shift into Park and turn off the wipers .
Touch Controls > Service > Wiper Service Mode > ON to move the wipers to the service position .
Lift the wiper arm a short distance away from the windshield , just far enough to access the wiper blade .
Do not lift a wiper arm beyond its intended position .
Place a towel under the wiper arm to avoid scratching or cracking the windshield in case it lowers down for any reason .
Hold the wiper arm and press the locking tab while sliding the blade down the arm .
Align the new blade on the wiper arm and slide it toward the hooked end of the arm until it locks into place .
Carefully place the wiper blades against the windshield .
Turn Wiper Service Mode off to return the wipers to their normal position .
Cleaning Washer Jets The position of the windshield washers is set at the factory and should never need adjusting .
If a windshield washer becomes blocked , use a thin strand of wire to clear any blockages from the nozzle .
Windshield washer fluid can irritate eyes and skin .
Pull the maintenance panel upward to release the clips that hold it in place .
Checking Brake Fluid Warning : Contact Tesla immediately if you notice increased movement of the brake pedal or a significant loss of brake fluid .
Driving under these conditions can result in extended stopping distances or complete brake failure .
A red brake indicator on the touchscreen alerts you if the quantity of fluid in the brake reservoir drops below the recommended level .
If it displays while driving , stop as soon as safety permits by gently applying the brakes .
Topping Up the Brake Fluid Do not top up your brake fluid .
The following instructions are provided for information purposes and future reference only : 1 .
Clean the filler cap before removing it to prevent dirt from entering the reservoir .
Unscrew the cap and remove it .
Top up the reservoir to the MAX mark using the appropriate brake fluid .
Replace the filler cap , ensuring it is fully secured .
Never use previously used fluid or fluid from a previously opened container—fluid absorbs moisture which decreases braking performance .
Keep containers sealed and out of the reach of children .
In the event of accidental consumption , seek medical attention immediately .
Immediately soak up any spills with an absorbent cloth and wash the area with a mixture of car shampoo and water .
If checking the Battery coolant , remove the cabin intake trim panel by pulling it upwards to release the clips that hold it in place .
Caution : The maintenance panel protects the front trunk from water .
Checking Battery Coolant Your Battery coolant should not need to be replaced for the life of your vehicle under most circumstances .
However , if the quantity of fluid in the cooling system drops below the recommended level , the touchscreen displays a warning message .
Stop driving Model 3 as soon as safety permits and contact Tesla .
Fluid Level Check DO NOT REMOVE THE FILLER CAP AND DO NOT ADD FLUID .
Doing so can result in damage not covered by the warranty .
Do Not Top Up Battery Coolant Warning : Battery coolant can be hazardous and can irritate eyes and skin .
Under no circumstances should you remove the filler cap and/or add coolant .
If the touchscreen warns you that the fluid level is low , contact Tesla immediately .
Contact Tesla for more specific information about the coolant .
Maintenance 149 Fluid Reservoirs Topping Up Windshield Washer Fluid The only reservoir into which you can add fluid is the windshield washer fluid reservoir , which is located behind the front trunk .
Clean around the filler cap before opening it to prevent dirt from entering the reservoir .
While avoiding spilling , fill the reservoir until the fluid level is visible just below the filler neck .
Wipe up any spills immediately and wash the affected area with water .
VOCs are commonly used as antifreeze in washer fluid .
Use a washer fluid with limited VOC content only if it provides adequate freeze resistance for all climates in which you drive Model 3 .
Caution : Do not add formulated washer fluids that contain water repellent or bug wash .
In cold weather , using a washer fluid without antifreeze can impair visibility through the windshield .
Warning : Windshield washer fluid can irritate eyes and skin .
Read and observe the instructions provided by the washer fluid manufacturer .
Ensure that any non-Tesla repair facility is aware of these lifting points .
Position the lift arm pads under the designated body lift points at the locations shown .
Warning : DO NOT position the lift arm pads under the Battery or side rails , as shown in red .
Adjust the height and position of the lift arm pads to ensure that they are correctly located .
With assistance , raise the lift to the desired height , ensuring the lift arm pads remain in their correct positions .
Warning : Never raise Model 3 when the charge cable is connected , even if charging is not in progress .
Warning : Do not work on an incorrectly supported vehicle .
Place the lift arm pads under the designated body lift points only .
The locations shown are the only approved lifting points for Model 3 .
Lifting at any other points can cause damage .
Damage caused by incorrectly lifting Model 3 is not covered by the warranty .
Maintenance 151 Parts and Accessories Parts , Accessories , and Modifications Use only genuine Tesla parts and accessories .
Tesla performs rigorous testing on parts to ensure their suitability , safety , and reliability .
Purchase these parts from Tesla , where they are professionally installed and where you can receive expert advice about modifications to Model 3 .
Accessories are available for purchase from Tesla stores or online at www.tesla.com/shop .
Tesla is unable to assess parts manufactured by other distributors and therefore accepts no responsibility if you use non-Tesla parts on Model 3 .
Any damage caused by using or installing non-approved parts , or by performing non-approved modifications , is not covered by the warranty .
Warning : Tesla does not accept liability for death , personal injury or damage that occurs if you use or install non-approved accessories or make non-approved modifications .
Accessory Wheels and Tires If your Model 3 is fitted with Tesla accessory wheels or tires , the Gross Axle Weight Rating ( GAWR ) , wheel , tire , and loading information may be different from the labels shown on the vehicle .
Refer to the relevant following section for updated information .
Note : If your vehicle is not fitted with Tesla accessory wheels or tires ( it is fitted with the factory original wheels and tires , including Tesla genuine replacement parts ) , refer to the labels attached to the center door pillar for the most accurate information for your Model 3 .
Maintenance 153 Parts and Accessories Body Repairs If Model 3 is in a collision , contact Tesla to ensure that it is repaired with genuine Tesla parts .
Tesla has selected and approved body shops that meet strict requirements for training , equipment , quality , and customer satisfaction .
Some repair shops and insurance companies might suggest using non-original equipment or salvaged parts to save money .
However , these parts do not meet Tesla 's high standards for quality , fit and corrosion resistance .
In addition , non-original equipment and salvaged parts ( and any damage or failures they might cause ) are not covered by the warranty .
Using RFID Transponders When attaching an RFID transponder ( used by many automated toll systems ) inside Model 3 , place the transponder on the right side of the rear view mirror as shown .
This ensures best results and minimizes any obstruction to your driving view .
Installing Front License Plate Bracket To accommodate jurisdictions that require a license plate on the front of your vehicle , Model 3 is equipped with a license plate bracket .
This bracket conforms to the shape of your vehicle 's front bumper and is adhered to it using strong adhesive .
Cold and/or wet conditions may result in reduced performance of the adhesive .
Get isopropyl alcohol and test it on a non- visible painted surface of your vehicle to confirm that it does not damage or remove the paint .
Clean the mounting site with isopropyl alcohol and allow to dry for at least one minute .
Fully remove the protective tape from the adhesive at the top of the bracket and partially remove the tape from the top of the adhesive on each side .
Leave the bottom half of the tape on the sides in place and fold the unattached tape outward for easy removal after aligning the bracket to the bumper .
While tilting the top of the license plate bracket away from the bumper ( to prevent adhering it to the wrong location ) , align the bottom center of the license plate bracket with the middle of the grille as shown .
Note : Be as precise as possible when aligning the bracket because you will be unable to reposition it once adhered to the bumper .
While correctly aligned , move the top of the bracket against the bumper and apply pressure so that it is held in place by the adhesive .
Remove the remaining tape from the sides of the bracket then press the entire bracket firmly against the bumper , ensuring the bracket is held in place by all adhesive areas .
Maintenance 155 Identification Labels Vehicle Identification Number You can find the VIN at the following locations : • Touch the Tesla `` T '' at the top center of the touchscreen .
The popup window displays the VIN .
Can be seen by looking through the windshield .
Emission Control Label The emission control label is located on the opening face of the rear trunk .
156 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Vehicle Loading Load Capacity Labeling It is important to understand how much weight your Model 3 can safely carry .
This weight is called the vehicle capacity weight and includes the weight of all occupants , cargo and any additional equipment added to your Model 3 since it was manufactured .
Two labels attached to Model 3 indicate how much weight Model 3 can safely carry .
Both labels are visible on the door pillar when the front door is open .
Note : If your Model 3 is fitted with Tesla accessory wheels or tires , your Model 3 may include an additional label indicating that load capacity may differ from what is stated on the label .
If this is the case , instead of referring to the label , refer to the Owners Manual .
Vehicle Certification Label Warning : Overloading Model 3 has an adverse effect on braking and handling , which can compromise your safety or cause damage .
Tire and Loading Information Label The Tire and Loading Information label provides : • The maximum number of occupant seating positions .
• The cold inflation pressures for the original front and rear tires .
These pressures are recommended to optimize ride and handling characteristics .
Note : If Model 3 is loaded to its full capacity , double check all tires to ensure they are inflated to their recommended pressure levels .
• GAWR FRT and GAWR RR - Gross Axle Weight Rating for the front and rear axles .
The GAWR is the maximum distributed weight that each axle can support .
Specifications 157 Vehicle Loading Description Total Caution : To prevent damage , never load Model 3 so that it is heavier than GVWR or exceeds the individual GAWR weights .
Locate the statement “ The combined weight of occupants and cargo should never exceed XXX lbs or XXX kg ” on the “ Tire and Loading Information ” label .
Determine the combined weight of all occupants that will ride in the vehicle .
Subtract the combined weight of the occupants from XXX lbs or XXX kg ( see Step 1 ) .
The resulting figure equals the available cargo load capacity .
Determine the combined cargo weight being loaded on the vehicle .
That weight must not exceed the available cargo load capacity calculated in Step 4 .
Warning : Trunks are the preferred places to carry objects .
In a collision , or during hard braking and sharp turns , loose items in the cabin could injure occupants .
Example Load Limit Calculations How much cargo Model 3 can carry depends on the number and weight of passengers .
If passengers weigh more or less , available cargo weight decreases or increases respectively .
Towing can cause damage and increase the risk of a collision .
Caution : Using Model 3 for towing before Tesla-approved towing components and accessories are available may void the warranty .
To install roof racks , you must use this accessory and you must use only roof rack systems that have been approved by Tesla ( see Parts and Accessories on page 152 ) .
Failure to do so can cause significant damage .
Note : Mounting accessories and roof rack systems may not be available at time of vehicle purchase .
Refer to the tire pressures printed on the Tire and Loading Information label .
This label is located on the center door pillar and is visible when the driver ’ s door is open ( see Maintaining Tire Pressures on page 138 ) .
Specifications 165 Wheels and Tires Understanding Tire Markings Laws require tire manufacturers to place standardized information on the sidewall of all tires .
This information identifies and describes the fundamental characteristics of the tire .
It also provides the tire identification number ( TIN ) for certification of safety standards , and in case of a recall .
This 3-digit number is the width ( in millimeters ) of the tire from sidewall edge to sidewall edge .
R indicates that the tire is of Radial ply construction .
This 2-digit number is the diameter of the wheel rim in inches .
This number is not always shown .
The maximum load which can be carried by the tire .
This pressure should not be used for normal driving .
This 2-digit number is the sidewall height as a percentage of the tread width .
When stated , indicates the maximum speed ( in mph ) at which the tire can be used for extended periods .
The number of plies in both the tread area and the sidewall area indicates how many layers of rubber coated material make up the structure of the tire .
Information is also provided on the type of materials used .
Begins with the letters DOT and indicates that the tire meets all federal standards .
The next 2 digits/letters represent the plant code where it was manufactured , and the last 4 digits represent the week and year of manufacture .
This information can be used to contact consumers if a tire defect requires a recall .
The higher the treadwear number is , the longer it should take for the tread to wear down .
A higher graded tire should allow you to stop your vehicle in a shorter distance than a tire with a lower grade .
This grading is provided for a correctly inflated tire , which is being used within its speed and loading limits .
Specifications 167 Wheels and Tires Uniform Tire Quality Grading The following information relates to the tire grading system developed by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) , which grades tires by tread wear , traction and temperature performance .
Tires that have deep tread , and winter tires , are exempt from these marking requirements .
Where applicable , quality grades are found on the tire ’ s sidewall between the tread shoulder and maximum section width .
Note : In addition to the marking requirements , passenger car tires must conform to Federal Safety Requirements .
Treadwear The treadwear grade is a comparative rating based on the wear rate of the tire when tested under controlled conditions on a specified government test course .
The relative performance of tires depends on the actual conditions of their use , however , and can depart significantly from the norm due to variations in driving habits , service practices , road characteristics , and climate .
Do not drive if a tire is damaged , excessively worn , or is inflated to an incorrect pressure .
The safety of the vehicle and occupants can be adversely affected .
Check tires regularly for wear and to ensure there are no cuts , bulges or exposure of the ply/cord structure .
Warning : The traction grade assigned to the tire is based on straight-ahead braking tests , and does not include : acceleration , cornering , hydroplaning or peak traction characteristics .
Sustained high temperature can cause the tire to degenerate and reduce tire life , and excessive temperature can lead to sudden tire failure .
The grade C corresponds to the minimum level of performance that all passenger car tires must meet under the Federal Motor Safety Standard No .
Grades B and A represent levels of performance on the laboratory test wheel that exceed the minimum requirements .
168 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Wheels and Tires Tire and Loading Glossaries General Wheel and Tire Terms Accessory Weight Cold Tire Pressure Curb Weight Gross Vehicle Weight kPa ( kilo pascal ) Maximum Loaded Vehicle Weight PSI ( lbf/in2 ) Rim Vehicle Capacity Weight Load Carrying Definitions Occupant distribution Passenger car tire The combined weight ( in excess of those items replaced ) of items available as factory installed equipment .
The air pressure in a tire that has been standing in excess of three hours , or driven for less than one mile .
The weight of a standard vehicle , including any optional equipment fitted , and with the correct fluid levels .
The metal support for a tire , or tire and tube , upon which the tire beads are seated .
The number of seats multiplied by 150 lbs plus the rated amount of load/luggage .
Bead The inner edge of a tire that is shaped to fit to the rim and form an air tight seal .
The bead is constructed of steel wires which are wrapped , or reinforced , by the ply cords .
Maximum Inflation Pressure The maximum pressure to which the tire should be inflated .
Caution : This pressure marked on the tire is the maximum allowed by the tire manufacturer .
It is not the pressure Tesla recommends using for Model 3 .
Production Options Weight The combined weight of options installed which weigh in excess of 3 lb more than the standard items that they replaced , and are not already considered in curb or accessory weights .
Recommended Tire Inflation Pressure Tire inflation pressure , established by Tesla , which is based on the type of tires that are mounted on the vehicle at the factory .
This information can be found on the Tire and Loading Information label located on the door pillar .
Normal occupant weight 68 kilograms ( 150 lbs ) times the number of occupants specified in the second column of the tables for calculating load limits ( see Vehicle Loading on page 157 ) .
Specifications 169 Wheels and Tires Rim diameter Rim size designation Rim type designation Rim width Pneumatic Radial Tire Definitions Bead separation Carcass Chunking Cord Cord separation Cracking Extra load tire Groove Inner liner Inner liner separation Load rating Maximum load rating Measuring rim Open splice Outer diameter Nominal diameter of the bead seat .
Vehicle maximum load on the tire Load on an individual tire that is determined by distributing to each axle its share of the maximum loaded vehicle weight and dividing by two .
Vehicle normal load on the tire Load on an individual tire that is determined by distributing to each axle its share of the curb weight , accessory weight , and normal occupant weight and dividing by two .
A breakdown of the bond between components in the bead .
The tire structure , except tread and sidewall rubber which , that when inflated , bears the load .
The breaking away of pieces of the tread or sidewall .
The strands forming the plies in the tire .
The parting of cords from adjacent rubber compounds .
Any parting within the tread , sidewall , or inner liner of the tire extending to cord material .
A tire designed to operate at higher loads and higher inflation pressure than the corresponding standard tire .
The space between two adjacent tread ribs .
The parting of the inner liner from cord material in the carcass .
The maximum load that a tire is rated to carry for a given inflation pressure .
The load rating for a tire at the maximum permissible inflation pressure for that tire .
The rim on which a tire is fitted for physical dimension requirements .
Any parting at any junction of tread , sidewall , or inner liner that extends to the cord material .
The overall diameter of an inflated new tire .
Bias ply tire A pneumatic tire in which the ply cords that extend to the beads are laid at alternate angles substantially less than 90 degrees to the center line of the tread .
170 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Wheels and Tires Overall width The linear distance between the exteriors of the sidewalls of an inflated tire , including elevations due to labeling , decorations , or protective bands or ribs .
Ply Ply separation Reinforced tire Sidewall Sidewall separation Test rim Tread Tread rib Tread separation Tread wear indicators ( TWI ) Wheel-holding fixture A layer of rubber-coated parallel cords .
A tire designed to operate at higher loads and at higher inflation pressures than the corresponding standard tire .
The portion of a tire between the tread and bead .
The parting of the rubber compound from the cord material in the sidewall .
The rim on which a tire is fitted for testing , and may be any rim listed as appropriate for use with that tire .
The portion of a tire that comes into contact with the road .
The pulling away of the tread from the tire carcass .
The projections within the principal grooves designed to give a visual indication of the degrees of wear of the tread .
The fixture used to hold the wheel and tire assembly securely during testing .
Pneumatic tire A mechanical device made of rubber , chemicals , fabric and steel or other materials , that , when mounted on an automotive wheel , provides the traction and contains the gas or fluid that sustains the load .
Radial ply tire A pneumatic tire in which the ply cords that extend to the beads are laid at substantially 90 degrees to the center line of the tread .
Section width The linear distance between the exteriors of the sidewalls of an inflated tire , excluding elevations due to labeling , decoration , or protective bands .
The VIN is displayed when you touch the Tesla `` T '' at the top of the touchscreen .
The VIN can also been seen on the upper dashboard by looking through the driver 's side of the windshield .
Tesla Roadside Assistance is available to speak with roadside service professionals 24/7/365 to answer any questions and explain the proper procedure for transporting your Model 3 .
172 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Instructions for Transporters DO NOT TRANSPORT WITH WHEELS ON THE GROUND The rear motor in Model 3 generates power when the wheels spin .
Always transport Model 3 with all four tires off the ground .
Ensure that the tires are unable to spin at any time during transport .
Warning : NEVER TRANSPORT YOUR VEHICLE WITH THE TIRES IN A POSITION WHERE THEY CAN SPIN .
DOING SO CAN LEAD TO SIGNIFICANT DAMAGE AND OVERHEATING .
IN RARE CASES EXTREME OVERHEATING MAY CAUSE THE SURROUNDING COMPONENTS TO IGNITE .
Do not transport Model 3 using any method that is not specified by Tesla .
Adhere to the instructions provided in the following sections and observe all warnings and cautions provided .
Damage caused by improper transporting of your vehicle is not covered by the warranty .
Approved Methods for Transporting Note : The tires are allowed to rotate slowly ( under 3 mph or 5 km/h ) and for a very short distance ( less than 30 feet or 10 meters ) only when Transport Mode is enabled ( see Activate Transport Mode ) while the vehicle is being winched onto a flatbed truck or pulled out of a parking space for repositioning .
Exceeding these boundaries can lead to significant damage and overheating that is not covered by the warranty .
A flatbed truck or comparable transport vehicle is the recommended method of transporting Model 3 .
The vehicle can face either direction when using a flatbed .
If Model 3 must be transported without a flatbed truck , then wheel lifts and dollies must be used to ensure that all four wheels are off of the ground .
With this method , Tesla recommends the vehicle facing forward so that the front wheels are lifted and the rear wheels are on dollies .
If Transport Mode is not available or the touchscreen is not accessible , self-loading dollies or tire skates must be used to load the vehicle into the approved transportation position .
Tesla is not responsible for any damage caused by transporting Model 3 , including personal property damage caused by using self- loading dollies or tire skates .
until emergency response professionals have evaluated the vehicle and can accurately confirm that all high voltage systems are no longer energized .
Failure to do so may result in serious injury .
Roadside Assistance 173 Instructions for Transporters Activate Transport Mode Transport Mode keeps the parking brake disengaged while winching Model 3 onto a flatbed truck .
You are unable to use the touchscreen to activate Transport Mode if Model 3 has no power .
Transport Mode is available only when a key is detected .
Ensure the vehicle is in Park .
Chock the tires or otherwise ensure Model 3 is secure .
Press and hold the Transport Mode button until it turns blue .
Caution : If the electrical system is not working , and you therefore can not use the touchscreen to activate Transport Mode , use self-loading dollies or tire skates .
Before doing so , always check the manufacturer 's specifications and recommended loading capacity .
Pull onto the Flatbed Truck Note : If Model 3 has no 12V power , you need an external 12V power supply to open the hood or use the touchscreen .
Using the chassis , frame , or suspension components to pull the vehicle can result in damage .
The tow eye is located under the carpet in the front trunk .
Release the tow eye cover by pressing firmly on the top right perimeter of the cover until it pivots inward , then gently pulling the raised section toward you .
Fully insert the tow eye into the opening , then turn it counter-clockwise until securely fastened .
Attach the winch cable to the tow eye .
• Ensure any metal parts on the tie-down straps do not contact painted surfaces or the face of the wheels .
Caution : Attaching the tie-down straps to the chassis , suspension or other parts of the vehicle 's body may cause damage .
If Model 3 Has No Power If Model 3 has no 12V power , perform the following steps to open the hood or jump start the auxiliary 12V battery .
Jump Starting the 12V Battery Caution : Model 3 can not be used to jump start another vehicle .
Doing so can result in damage .
Remove the maintenance panel by pulling it upwards to release the trim clips that hold it in place .
Remove the cabin intake trim panel by pulling it upwards to release the trim clips that hold it in place .
Caution : To avoid damaging Model 3 , do not allow the positive cable to contact other metal components , such as the battery tie-down bracket .
Touch the touchscreen to wake it up .
Note : It may take several minutes to receive enough power to wake up the touchscreen .
Replace the cabin intake trim panel by placing it back in its original location and pressing down until it is secure .
Replace the maintenance panel by placing it back in its original location and pressing down until it is secure .
Below is a list of the Easter Eggs that have been discovered so far and how to access them .
For This Do This Atari Games Feeling nostalgic ?
While in Park , access Atari games from your Easter Egg tray then select a game from the menu at the top , enter some quarters , and touch Start to play .
Note that , depending on the game , you may need to use your steering wheel buttons to play .
Visit Rainbow Road by moving the gear lever fully down four times in quick succession while Autosteer is enabled .
Touch Publish to submit your artistic compositions to Tesla for critiquing .
The map shows your Model 3 as a rover on the Martian landscape , and the About Your Tesla box displays SpaceX 's interplanetary spaceship .
The Answer to the Ultimate Question of Life , The Universe , and Everything Rename your car to 42 ( see Naming Your Vehicle on page 101 ) and notice the new name of your Model 3 .
Romance Mode You can ’ t roast chestnuts by an open fire in your car , but you can still cozy up with your loved ones by this virtual fireplace .
While in Park , access Romance Mode from your Easter Egg tray .
Queue the music and get your romance on !
Emissions Testing Mode Holiday fun can come in surprising ways .
Access Emissions Testing Mode from your Easter Egg tray , then select your preferred fart style and a target seat .
Activate by pressing the left scroll wheel button when you ’ re ready to “ release ” your prank .
Consumer Information 177 About this Owner Information Document Applicability Owner information is updated regularly to reflect updates to your vehicle .
To display information about recently released features , view the Release Notes on the touchscreen .
Release Notes are displayed on the touchscreen after a software update , and can be displayed at any time by touching the Tesla `` T '' at the top of the touchscreen , then touching the Release Notes link .
If information related to how to use the touchscreen conflicts with information in the Release Notes , the Release Notes take precedence .
Illustrations Illustrations are provided for demonstration purposes only .
Depending on vehicle options , software version , region of purchase , and specific settings , your vehicle may appear slightly different .
Although the owner information is applicable to both right-hand drive and left-hand drive vehicles , many illustrations show only left-hand drive vehicles .
However , the essential information that the illustrations are providing is correct .
Errors or Inaccuracies All specifications and descriptions are known to be accurate at time of publishing .
However , because continuous improvement is a goal at Tesla , we reserve the right to make product modifications at any time .
To communicate any inaccuracies or omissions , or to provide general feedback or suggestions regarding the quality of this owner information , send an email to OwnersManualFeedback @ Tesla.com .
Location of Components Owner information may specify the location of a component as being on the left or right side of the vehicle .
Copyrights and Trademarks All information in this document and all vehicle software is subject to copyright and other intellectual property rights of Tesla , Inc. and its licensors .
This material may not be modified , reproduced or copied , in whole or in part , without the prior written permission of Tesla , Inc. and its licensors .
Additional information is available upon request .
Tesla uses software created by the Open Source community .
HD Radio is a registered trademark of iBiquity Digital Corporation .
The following are trademarks or registered trademarks of Tesla , Inc. in the United States and other countries : All other trademarks contained in this document are the property of their respective owners and their use herein does not imply sponsorship or endorsement of their products or services .
The unauthorized use of any trademark displayed in this document or on the vehicle is strictly prohibited .
The main purpose of an EDR is to record , in certain crash or near crash-like situations , such as an air bag deployment or hitting a road obstacle , data that will assist in understanding how a vehicle 's systems performed .
The EDR is designed to record data related to vehicle dynamics and safety systems for a short period of time , typically 30 seconds or less .
The EDR in Model 3 is designed to record data such as : • How various systems in your vehicle were operating ; • Whether or not the driver and passenger safety belts were buckled/fastened ; • How far ( if at all ) the driver was depressing the accelerator and/or brake pedal ; and , • How fast the vehicle was traveling .
The data can help provide a better understanding of the circumstances in which crashes and injuries occur .
However , other parties , such as law enforcement , could combine the EDR data with the type of personally identifying data routinely acquired during a crash investigation .
To read data recorded by an EDR , special equipment is required , and access to the vehicle or the EDR is needed .
In addition to the vehicle manufacturer , other parties , such as law enforcement , that have the special equipment , can read the information if they have access to the vehicle or the EDR .
Vehicle Telematics Model 3 is equipped with electronic modules that monitor and record data from various vehicle systems , including the motor , Autopilot components , Battery , braking and electrical systems .
The electronic modules record information about various driving and vehicle conditions , including braking , acceleration , trip and other related information regarding your vehicle .
The data is stored by the vehicle and may be accessed , used and stored by Tesla service technicians during vehicle servicing or periodically transmitted to Tesla wirelessly through the vehicle ’ s telematics system .
This data may be used by Tesla for various purposes , including , but not limited to : providing you with Tesla telematics services ; troubleshooting ; evaluation of your vehicle ’ s quality , functionality and performance ; analysis and research by Tesla and its partners for the improvement and design of our vehicles and systems ; and as otherwise may be required by law .
In servicing your vehicle , Tesla can potentially resolve issues remotely simply by reviewing your vehicle ’ s data log .
The data is used as previously described and helps ensure the proper maintenance of your vehicle .
Additional Model 3 features may use your vehicle ’ s telematics system and the information provided , including features such as charging reminders , software updates , and remote access to , and control of , various systems of your vehicle .
Tesla does not disclose the data recorded in your vehicle to any third party except when : • An agreement or consent from the vehicle ’ s owner ( or the leasing company for a leased vehicle ) is obtained .
• Used for research purposes without disclosing details of the vehicle owner or identification information .
Consumer Information 179 Disclaimers • Disclosed to a Tesla affiliated company , including their successors or assigns , or our information systems and data management providers .
In addition , and subject to local law , Tesla does not disclose the data recorded to an owner unless it pertains to a non-warranty repair service and in this case , will disclose only the data that is related to the repair .
For additional information regarding how Tesla processes data collected from your vehicle , please review Tesla ’ s privacy policy at www.tesla.com/about/legal .
Data Sharing For quality assurance and to support the continuous improvement of advanced features such as Autopilot , Tesla measures road segment data of all participating vehicles .
All Tesla vehicles can learn from the experience of the billions of miles that Tesla vehicles have driven .
Although Tesla shares this data with partners that contribute similar data , the data does not include any personally identifiable information about you or your vehicle .
To allow data sharing , touch Controls > Safety & Security > Data Sharing , touch the Yes buttons to confirm that you agree to allow Tesla to collect the associated type of data , then submit your response .
Note : Although Model 3 uses GPS in connection with driving and operation , as discussed in this owner 's manual , Tesla does not record or store vehicle-specific GPS information .
Quality Control You might notice a few miles/km on the odometer when you take delivery of your Model 3 .
The testing process includes extensive inspections during and after production .
The final inspection takes place at Tesla and includes a road test conducted by a technician .
California Proposition 65 Warning : Operating , servicing and maintaining a passenger vehicle or off- highway motor vehicle can expose you to chemicals including phthalates and lead , which are known to the State of California to cause cancer and birth defects or other reproductive harm .
To minimize exposure , wear gloves or wash your hands frequently when servicing your vehicle .
Warning : Certain components of this vehicle such as airbag modules and seat belt pre-tensioners may contain Perchlorate Material .
Special handling may be required for service or vehicle end of life disposal .
180 Model 3 Owner 's Manual Reporting Safety Defects Contacting Tesla For detailed information about your Model 3 , go to www.tesla.com , and log on to your Tesla Account , or sign up to get an account .
Note : You can also use voice commands to provide feedback to Tesla .
Tesla periodically reviews these notes and uses them to continue improving Model 3 .
Reporting Safety Defects - US If you believe that Model 3 has a defect which could cause a crash or could cause injury or death , you should immediately inform the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) in addition to notifying Tesla .
If NHTSA receives similar complaints , it may open an investigation .
If it finds that a safety defect exists in a group of vehicles , it may order a recall and remedy campaign .
However , NHTSA can not become involved in individual problems between you , your dealer , or Tesla .
You can also obtain other information about motor vehicle safety from www.safercar.gov .
Reporting Safety Defects - Canada If you believe that your Model 3 has a defect which could cause a crash or could cause injury or death , you should immediately inform Transport Canada , in addition to notifying Tesla .
This device must accept any interference received , including interference that may cause undesired operation .
Changes or modifications not expressly approved by Tesla could void your authority to operate the equipment .
Important Note : FCC Radiation Exposure : This equipment complies with FCC radiation exposure limits for an uncontrolled environment .
Caution : This equipment and its antennas must not be co-located or operated with any other antenna or transmitter .
This device must accept any interference received , including interference that may cause undesired operation .
IMPORTANT NOTE : IC Radiation Exposure Statement This equipment complies with IC RSS-102 radiation exposure limits set forth for an uncontrolled environment .
Cet équipement est conforme aux limites d ’ exposition aux rayonnements IC établies pour unenvironnement non contrôlé .
Le présent appareil est conforme aux CNR d'Industrie Canada applicables aux appareils radioexempts de licence .
This device must accept any interference received , including interference that may cause undesired operation .
Changes or modifications not expressly approved by Tesla could void your authority to operate the equipment .
This device must accept any interference received , including interference that may cause undesired operation .
This device must accept any interference received , including interference that may cause undesired operation .
Changes or modifications not expressly approved by Tesla could void your authority to operate the equipment .
Operation is subject to the following conditions : • This device may not cause harmful interference .
• This device must accept any interference received , including interference that may cause undesired operation .
Any changes or modifications to the device not expressly approved by the manufacturer or Tesla could void your authority to operate the equipment .
Radio Frequency Information This equipment has been tested and found to comply with the limits for a Class B digital device , pursuant to Part 15 of the FCC Rules .
These limits are designed to provide reasonable protection against harmful interference in a residential installation .
This equipment generates , uses and can radiate radio frequency energy and , if not installed and used in accordance with the instructions , may cause harmful interference to radio communications .
However , there is no guarantee that interference will not occur in a particular installation .
If this equipment does cause harmful interference to radio or television reception , which can be determined by turning the equipment off and on , try to correct the interference by one or more of the following measures : • Reorient or relocate the receiving antenna .
• Connect the equipment into an outlet on a circuit different from that to which the receiver is connected .