This text can be freely copied , distributed and used for formal and informal educational purposes .
Eliminate the Toxicant from the Body .
Toxicants Toxicology studies the injurious effects of chemical and physical agents ( including energy ) on living organisms , observed as alterations in structure and function .
The variety of injurious effects becomes apparent if we examine the major causes of death ( F1.1 ) .
Many of these diseases are caused or accelerated by exposure to toxic substances .
Toxicity data from various bio-medical sciences document the effects of exposure to natural or artificial agents .
For more information on the history and scope of Toxicology , the student is referred to Casarett and Doull 's Toxicology .
 Hemlock ( Conium maculatum ) Egg of the zebra longwing butterfly Toxicant Control For pharmaceuticals and pesticides , producers have the burden of demonstrating safety to government .
By contrast , for industrial chemicals , government must prove that a chemical poses a risk before it can restrict its production or use .
But companies have little incentive to develop information , since this increases the likelihood that evidence of harm will be uncovered .
Changes are on the way , however : Canada recently completed the Domestic Substances List ( DSL ) , mandated by law in 1999 , which for the first time examined information available on the roughly 23,000 previously unassessed chemicals that have been in commerce in Canada over the last two decades , and identified more than 4,300 warranting further scrutiny .
It requires producers and users of 30,000 chemicals in commerce in Europe to register them and to provide information on their production , use , hazard and exposure potential .
Chemicals of very high concern will be allowed only by authorization .
to dispel the idea that natural is by definition healthy , consider the following .
many medicinal plants used by nearly 100 cultures on different continents are related , testifying to their efficacy .
The hemlock plant ( at right ) was the state method of execution in ancient Greece , Socrates was one of its victims .
Honey bees gather pollen from a variety of natural flowers which may contain toxins .
From rhododendrons , one can get grayanotoxins , which bind reversibly to cell membranes , allowing the passage of sodium and leading to weakness , slow heartbeat , perspiration and nausea ( the symptoms of a heart attack ) .
The zebra longwing butterflys gather toxicants ingested from plants they eat , and produce eggs laced with cyanide and other toxins ( the egg is illustrated below ) .
When preparing potions based on plant sources , one has to take into account the fact that the initial material may contain more or less of the active agent , depending on season , growth conditions or even time of day .
This is why the pharmaceutical industry generally looks for natural remedies to provide leads particular by challenging metabolic pathways in very specific and forceful ways .
Although these differences appear small , they are enough to underlie large toxicity differences .
Heavy water interferes with the mitotic apparatus of higher organisms , including mammals , who soon become ill and die at the point where about half their body water has been replaced .
Bacteria are only able to grow slowly in pure heavy water .
Ionic pores are highly specific to metallic ions , but the selectivity of the pores is insufficient to avoid the substitution of lead for calcium , because both have similar atomic size ( 180 pm , see F7.4 ) .
Small differences in the properties of atoms have huge consequences for toxicity .
Hemoglobin started its career in worms as a binding agent to detoxify oxygen .
It was ultimately adopted by mammals in a slightly altered form for oxygen transport .
Causes of Death involve many diverse diseases and body systems .
to useful molecules , as opposed to using the grown material itself .
Scientists in laboratories are equally concerned with conducting studies using well defined agents .
The supply of uniform products is better served by synthesis laboratories than agriculture .
This has the consequence that most prepared drugs are based on a few purified molecules , as opposed to complex mixtures .
This purity may have undesirable consequences , in 1-4 It seems , from these examples , as if toxicity occurs by accident .
Mental or hemodynamic status may deteriorate rapidly .
The severity of symptoms and toxicokinetics of the ingested substance are considered in the disposition of an intoxicated person .
Observation time is based on toxicity , half-life and amount ingested , particularly if signs or symptoms of toxicity do not reverse during the observation period .
Not-so-Subtle Toxicity By contrast , some toxic molecules seem entirely conceived for nefarious goals .
In the Botulinum toxin molecule of F1.2 , Blue is the toxic fragment which paralyzes the muscles , Green is the pore opening the muscle ’ s membrane , Red-Yellow binds to receptors on nerve cells , and if you look closely , a green loop is designed to mask the toxic part ( Blue ) from the immune system .
Making Toxicity The human body itself generates toxins  , and may transform molecules into more dangerous species by the process of bioactivation ( see Chapter 8 ) .
Further , molecules in the body can become toxins as a result of changes in folding conformation , without any covalent chemical change .
Such changes lead protein to form aggregates , or to be misrouted within cells .
Pairs of molecules that are mirror images of each other can have lethal limits that are 17-38 times that of the other ( pyrethroid insecticides ) .
Molecular Structure of the Botulinum toxin .
As well , some substances are extremely hazardous when released accidentally as a result of chemical spills , industrial explosions , fires , or accidents involving railroad cars and trucks , or as a result of improper storage .
These chemicals have been studied specifically to design emergency responses following releases .
Treating Acute Toxicity Airway-breathing and circulation are always the most urgent considerations in emergency situations , to correct hypoxia and acidosis , and to maintain adequate circulation .
Identification of electrolyte imbalances ( renal function ) and liver impairment should be assessed using basic laboratory studies ( metabolic profile ) .
A toxoid is an altered form of a toxin , possessing little or no toxic power , but capable of inducing antibodies .
In liver cirrhosis , alcohol can cause infiltrations in liver tissue over long periods of time .
Nephrotoxic agents can induce very slow loss of nephrons in the kidney .
Identifying Intoxication Many intoxications cause common diseases and diffuse , nonspecific symptoms .
Malaise can be periodic if the exposure is rhythmic , as occurring during a work shift .
“ Do your symptoms get either worse or better at work ? ” and “ Do your symptoms get either worse or better on weekends ? ” In chronic intoxications , loss of appetite and weight are common symptoms .
The muscle inhibition of curare is more obvious than the nervous system hyperactivity connected with glutamate .
Generally , the slower the intoxication , the more difficult it is to relate to a specific situation .
Unless you know what to look for , a large number of tests may be needed to finally detect a poison .
But in acute cyanide poisoning , the odor is usually quite apparent at autopsy .
You may perceive the bitter almond taste of cyanide if you crush 2 or 3 apple seeds between your teeth .
Identifying Toxicants In the case of drugs , identification has traditionally been largely a matter of trial and error .
A similar problem exists in the process of drug discovery , where a number of laboratories race to find molecules with specific medicinal actions .
The Lipinsky11 rules predicting which molecules make good drugs ( to be taken by mouth ) relate essentially to absorption of the chemical , as opposed to its physiological action : molecules that can not reach their targets can not be effective drugs .
It is often difficult to distinguish cause from effect in biology , and this is particularly true in chronic toxicology .
Symptoms can be connected to organs , which can be connected to histological changes , which may be connected to specific agents .
An important problem is that the reaction of the body to a toxicant may increase as a function of time because of bioaccumulation , or may attenuate because of physiological adaptation ( toxicodynamics ) .
Number of hydrogen bonds donors less than 5 ( expressed as the sum of OHs and NHs ) .
Number of hydrogen bond acceptors less than 10 ( expressed as the sum of Ns and Os ) .
The ability to predict from molecular structure alone which molecules are toxic in the human body would be extremely precious .
Generally , real hints on toxicity purely from chemical structure are slim .
Accuracy of SAR analysis varies considerably depending on the particular chemical and on the predicted characteristic .
Unless some toxicity information is already available on a specific molecule or on a closely related molecular structure , we depend on experiments of various kinds .
The Partition Coefficient of the molecule should not be too high , otherwise the molecule will not be able to cross fatty cell membranes and travel through body fluids ( # 2 above ) .
Toxicants and Evolution In evolutionary development , tremendous efforts have been made to help animals identify toxicants .
The largest gene superfamily in vertebrates is that of the olfactory receptor genes .
The random scatter in natural products is thought to reflect unpredictability of physiological action , while the vertical concentrations in the synthetic products ( F1.4 right ) are thought to represent the practical preferences of synthesis chemists12 .
One way to find out is to look at the chemical properties of a group of chemicals that all have some action on the body : drugs .
A basic way of describing drugs distinguishes molecular core from functional groups .
Antibiotics Core complexity counts all possible ring sizes , from largest to smallest .
Functional group complexity compiles all the possible ways of counting functional groups , from longest to shortest .
The pharmaceutical industry has invested large efforts into the design of antibiotics ( bacterial toxicants ) .
Rather than focusing on specific structural chemical species , the strategy has generally been to address 4 major targets rather specific to bacteria : the cell wall , a structure found in bacteria , but not animals ( -lactam rings ) , protein production , DNA and RNA replication ( bacteria divide very rapidly ) , and folate synthesis , a nutrient which donates one carbon unit in various biosynthetic pathways .
In phenol , the core is benzene and the functional group is OH .
If one draws diagrams ( F1.4 ) positioning thousands of natural and synthetic drugs using axes representing Core complexity In the future , as a result of the development of molecular biology , drug identification may depend more on knowledge of genes , proteins and biochemical pathways .
Classification by Function Toxicants that have similar effects or uses can be grouped together , often reflecting applications .
Frequently , compounds that are chemically related are used for similar purposes and form sub-groups within the general classifications .
Scatter diagrams for natural and synthetic drugs .
1-8 Since bacteria are increasingly evading even the most potent front-line drugs , as resistance continues to rise , there is a clear need for new antibiotics .
In the last 50 years , just one antibiotic of an entirely new class has made it into clinical practice .
Looking for new antibiotics , some scientists turned to frog peptides , because most of our infections occur across mucus membranes .
But despite decades of work , and thousands of candidate compounds , not a single amphibian antimicrobial peptides has turned into a marketable drug .
The compound that came closest to success ( magainin ) , derived from the skin of the African clawed frog—passed through Phase II clinical trials for patients with diabetic foot ulcers , but the drug failed to get approval from the US FDA in 1999 .
Large peptides make poor drugs : some get metabolized too readily , while others trigger immune reactions .
Their size also makes it difficult to synthesize them in large enough quantities .
Not usually persistent in the environment .
Change cell membrane ion permeability , leading to altered firing rate .
Pyrethrins : synthetic versions of the pesticide pyrethrin occurring in the flower chrysanthemum .
Modified to increase their stability in the environment .
Some synthetic pyrethroids are toxic to the nervous system .
Do not evaporate or volatilize into the air or pose the same health concerns as synthetic pesticides .
Slower acting than the synthetic pesticides like diazinon or pyrethrins , but highly effective over a long period of time .
Application of parathion insecticide in India .
Most insecticides disrupt the nervous system .
Under the same doses by weight as insects , humans show similar symptoms .
Methyl parathion is now banned for use on most fruits and vegetables in the US because of effects on the development of children 's nervous system ( see Chap .
It is used in lice shampoos .
As an herbicide , boric acid causes desiccation or interrupts photosynthesis in plants .
The manganese and zinc coordination complexes are known as maneb and zineb , respectively .
Herbicides Mostly of low human toxicity , because of physiological differences between humans and plants .
Ingestion of concentrated paraquat almost always leads to death due to lung failure ( see Chapter 11 ) .
Rodenticides Most exposures are from accidents in industry , since they are directly applied to palatable animal baits .
Inhibits synthesis of vitamin K , leading to elimination of prothrombin and absence of clot formation .
Block many enzymes in the Krebs cycle , impeding ATP production .
Similar responses are not seen in humans with doses 30 times larger .
Blocks nicotinamide metabolism , leading to death from paralysis and respiratory arrest .
Peripheral neuropathy and numerous Central Nervous System effects have been noted .
In various incidents , seed was mistaken for grain in Turkey and Iraq , and was consumed by humans .
Metals Many metals have variable oxidation numbers , which presents an opportunity for physiological use ( ex , transport of oxygen by the iron of hemoglobin ) , but also for toxicity .
They may  Quebec is banning 2,4-D on the basis of possible carcinogenicity and endocrine and nervous system disturbances .
Metals also interfere in neurotransmission and energy metabolism , stimulate reactions , interact with DNA and create free radicals .
Metals may present in elemental , inorganic or organic forms .
Mercury is thought to impact the productivity of populations by reducing their ability to learn .
In the 1600s , women in Europe used white lead face paint , and mercury sulphide for rouge .
The white lead made their hair fall out , which explains the fashion for high foreheads , as hairlines receded .
Bacteria will grow over pieces of solid lead .
1-11 These ATPases are present in bacteria and mammalian membranes , and handle cations such as calcium , sodiumpotassium and protons .
In the Middle Ages , syphilis was treated with mercury , which was toxic to the bacterium ( the spirochete Treponema pallidum ) , but also to patients .
But occasionally , the liver would break down the organic arsenic compound into elemental arsenic , which is toxic to the liver .
A protective measure to avoid this toxicity was to give patients injections of vitamin C. Criminals favor arsenic because it is tasteless and odorless .
Arsenic exploits cellular pathways and binds to critical proteins .
In the early 1940s , penicillin replaced arsenic as the treatment of choice for syphilis .
Arsenic derivatives are still used to treat African sleeping sickness and remains an effective chemotherapy for acute forms of leukemia .
Metals are often eliminated through the kidneys , which become targets themselves .
Many metals are suspected of carcinogenicity , although we do not understand the exact mechanisms .
Metal Cr Co Cu Fe Mn Mo Se  Inorganic arsenic is a carcinogen ( arsenite ions probably cause extra blood vessels to develop around tumors ) , while organic forms are less toxic , combat animal diseases and accelerate growth .
Function Excess Produces A common ingredient in vitamin and mineral Hexavalent chromium supplements .
Mn Superoxide Dismutase is Manganese an important protector of Pneumonitis , mitochondria .
Aldehyde oxidase , Sulfite Anemia and Diarrhea oxidase and Zanthine oxidase .
Organic Solvents Food can be toxic ( mushrooms , rhubarb leaves ) , and more chemicals are released when food is cooked .
Since it helps breakdown cell membranes , it makes foods more digestible and more easily absorbed .
More than a thousand low molecular weight compounds are produced when food is heated , mostly at ppm levels , but the toxicity of these chemicals has not been established .
Organic solvents are widely used in industry and fall into a number of classes .
Other potentially carcinogenic chemicals that have raised concerns in the past include polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons , N-nitrosamines , aromatic amines and acrylamide .
However , there is no practical way to remove these chemicals from cooked or processed foods , and also there is not enough evidence that they present health risk to humans .
Classification by Potency : Toxicity is in the Dose Organic solvents , because of their solubility in cell membranes , often depress the Central Nervous System and irritate tissues and membranes .
Many are anesthetics , penetrating well into nervous and fatty tissues .
So , to 1-13 obtain a coherent toxicity classification , it is necessary to agree on the final outcome by which toxicity will be judged .
Although the determination of LD50 implies the death of animals ( unethical ) , it should be considered that almost any chemical manufactured will inevitably intoxicate some human at some time .
When this occurs , knowledge of the LD50 allows immediate evaluation of the gravity of the intoxication , a considerable advantage in clinical treatment .
LD50 generally refers to death of an animal , but it could also refer to death of a cell .
Ricin causes lethal damage to the gut if ingested , and to the lungs if inhaled .
Interestingly , the producers of bacteriocins also synthesize a second protein that pairs up with the antibiotic , keeping it inactive until it reaches its target .
Eliminate the Toxicant from the Body Once absorbed into the body , can toxicants be taken out ?
If the skin has been exposed , it can be washed .
The lung can take in toxicants , but it can also exhale them .
1-14 Emesis , the regurgitation of a poison taken via the oral route , can be induced by syrup of ipecac , but this must be done within tens of minutes to be effective .
If an ingested poison can not be vomited , perhaps it can be bound within the enterum using a high performance absorber such as carbon black , which provides a binding tight enough that the toxicant is chaperoned out of the body in the feces .
It does not bind lithium and potassium , iron or lead .
If the toxicant has escaped from the digestive system into the blood , perhaps injection of a chelator , able to specifically bind the toxic agent in the blood and help carry it out of the body , is possible .
For example , injections of the chelator ethylenediamine-tetra-acetic acid ( EDTA , shown ) have been the method of choice for the treatment of lead intoxication .
For many chemicals , the slow process of clinical recovery is closely related to elimination of the agent from the body , often monitored using blood plasma levels ( Chapter 4 , Toxicokinetics ) .
But some injuries can not be cured by elimination of the toxicant .
In burns , for example , the injurious agent dissipates completely following injury , but leaves behind manifestations such as edema , intravascular coagulation , small vessel thrombosis and ischemia , all this in the absence of the agent itself .
This underscores that the agent itself and its effects can have different half-lives .
More will be said on the elimination of toxicants in Chapters 4 and 8 .
There are basically two types of biological monitoring in toxic reactions : following the evolution of the toxicant concentration over time , and assessing the evolution of various aspects of the toxic injury .
These two aspects are often linked .
In this case , if appropriate chemicals can be ingested or injected , the effect of the toxicant may be compensated or at least blocked long enough for the toxicant to be naturally eliminated .
Occasionally , there are effective answers to such intoxications that can reverse the toxic effects .
In most cases , toxicants bound by chelators can be excreted from the body via the natural routes , mostly the liver and kidneys .
Specificity of Toxicants As a rule , simpler toxicants are likely to have more widespread effects among species and body systems .
The careless human handler can experience life-threatening consequences if given sufficient dose , just as the insect : here again , the toxic effects are relatively non species specific .
ANTIDOTES BY SPECIFIC BINDING TO THE TOXICANT Botulism Scorpion , spider , rattlesnake Botulinum antitoxin Specific Antivenins BY GENERAL BINDING TO THE TOXICANT ( CHELATION ) Arsenic and mercury Iron Lead Other toxicants depend on particularities of tissues or species , and are species-specific .
Protein toxicants are more likely to be specific .
Specific Toxic Effects Nebulized sodium bicarbonate Protamine Aspirin can kill cats and acetaminophen snakes , while guinea pigs can consume strychnine , which is very poisonous to humans .
Diclofenac was used to treat swelling and pain in cattle in India .
Allelopathic plants such as the black walnut , sycamore and sassafras trees release substances in the environment through their roots , leaves or by evaporation that limit the germination of competitors .
The toxicant specificity can involve very recognizable mechanisms : the spotted knapweed of the American west secretes catechin , which in tiny amounts induces apoptosis in other plants .
Wide-Ranging Toxic Effects For example , for embalming bodies , it is necessary to kill or halt the progress of a wide range of microorganisms .
Insects are vulnerable to many of the traditional pesticides because most of their bodies or food supplies are being sprayed , while humans are hopefully exposed to relatively 1.1.5.3 .
An unexpected toxicity was discovered : in sufficient quantities , pollen from Bt-plants also kills larvae of monarch butterflies .
Most toxicants are also tissue specific , presenting more risk to certain organs than to others .
Lead stored in bone , and organic solvents stored in fat do not cause functional damage , but both can seriously affect the nervous system , if they reach it .
In the case of drugs that need to be metabolized to be active , the patient may get no benefit if metabolism is too slow .
Definition of Dose Toxicologists assume that detection of adverse biological effects in animal models increases the chance that the same effects occur in humans .
But do the effects start at the same threshold dose ?
Although the most common way of specifying dose is weight of substance per weight of living subject ( for example , mg/kg ) , this metric is not necessarily the most useful .
Side-Effects Under the assumption of complete and uniform penetration of toxicants in a passive body , if one wished to obtain a constant toxicant concentration at the action sites , dose should be proportional to Mass to the first power ( Mass1 ) .
Some sideeffects such as rashes , fever , fatigue and nausea are mild , but some , like internal bleeding , reduction in white blood cell numbers and abnormal heart rhythms , are serious and can result in hospitalization and death .
Type “ C ” side effects affect something else than the intended target and are often caused by a metabolite of the drug .
About 60 % of drugs known to trigger adverse reactions do so because the patient metabolizes them too slowly , lengthening the effective time of exposure .
Imagine now the dynamic absorption of the toxicant through the body .
The concentration at the action site will be primarily determined by transfer across body membranes , for example the inside of the lungs , digestive system , or the inside surface of the vascular system .
In 1932 , Max Kleiber looked at a broad range of data from many animal models and found experimentally that metabolic rate was related to Mass3/4 .
The value of 3/4 falls between 1 and 2/3 , and this range is probably appropriate for the bulk of toxic reactions .
Levels of Exposure Therefore , both geometry and metabolism seem to point to the importance of maximum local concentrations as opposed to long-term bulk averages in determining toxicity .
High Exposures Victims of accidental or suicidal poisonings , occupationally exposed workers , bystanders ( workers nearby , those living close to an industrial facility emitting toxic agents ) and the general public typically have different exposures to a particular agent , as shown in F1.14 .
Refinements are possible in the definition of dose .
Since the molecular weight of the toxicant is not a factor in the expression of toxicity , perhaps an even better metric would be the number of moles of toxicant ( = a number of molecules ) per mass of animal to the power 0.75 .
Other scaling relations have been observed .
It is easiest to document toxic effects at the highest doses , where symptoms of toxicity are easily and rapidly detected .
If no discernible adverse health effects can be detected acutely ( within a day ) at high exposures , it is conveniently assumed that no life-threatening effects will be observed at lower levels over short periods .
It is simple , and toxicologists feel they have other more substantial inaccuracies to deal with in the conduct of their tests .
This value is know for a wide range of chemicals , in part because experiments are not too expensive .
Although LD50 levels are very important in guiding dosage for progressively longer tests to be performed subsequently at lower levels , toxicologists are most concerned with identifying toxic reactions that occur at the smallest exposures ( Lowest Observed Adverse Effect Level or LOAEL ) , because of the importance these levels have on ultimately determining safe limits over long periods of time in human populations .
Ranges of chronic toxic exposures in human populations .
Determinants of Toxic Action A 19th century view by Arndt is that weak stimuli slightly accelerate vital activity , middle-strong stimuli raise it , strong ones suppress it and very strong ones halt it .
Schultz published at that time many examples of yeast growth stimulation by subtoxic concentrations of various poisons ( iodine , bromine , arsenious acid ) .
The Arndt-Schultz law says that every stimulus on a living cell produces an activity inversely proportional ( within limits ) to the intensity of the stimulus5 .
This modulation with dose of the vital reaction is the inverse of the conventional dose response .
The basic principles of Toxicology attempt to give a theoretical framework for the understanding of toxic reactions , essentially defining the factors that will influence the development of toxicity .
1 - TOXICANT REACHING THE VULNERABLE SITE Molecular size , hydrophobicity-hydrophylicity and ionization of the toxicant mostly determine repartition within body compartments .
The toxicant exerts detectable effects if it reaches these body compartments .
Certainly , low doses of toxicants awaken responses in the immune system .
Southam and Erlich8 , who reported the stimulatory effect of an antifungal when used at low doses , proposed the term `` hormesis '' , defined as the stimulatory effect of sub-inhibitory concentrations of toxic substances .
Hormesis , a non-specific phenomenon increasing the resistance and growth of all living organisms , may be frequent in pharmacology and toxicology .
Many stimulants are toxic at high doses .
2 - TIME-COURSE OF TOXICANT DELIVERY Whether the same amount of a toxicant is administered as a single bolus , or spread over decades , will influence strongly the type and intensity of the toxic reaction .
How the body handles the toxicant by mechanisms of elimination is the subject of Toxicokinetics1 .
3 - ACTIVATION OF DETOXIFICATION MECHANISMS Living systems are adaptive , and deal with weak toxic exposures by maintaining homeostasis .
Therefore , weak toxic exposures can be accompanied by a tissue reaction to intoxication for a certain period of time .
These changes may be related to stress protein responses , DNA and cell repair mechanisms , and apoptosis ( culling of marginal cells ) .
1 Toxicokinetics is the mathematical description of the elimination of toxicants .
1-19 Adaptation to Toxicants This `` action-reaction '' mode of hormesis , coupled with the synthesis of specific defense molecules in reaction to mild intoxication , may explain why sub-lethal doses of toxicants trigger adaptive responses which maximize the innate poisoning resistance of living organisms30 .
This response , because it includes time for adaptation , is likely different from hormesis , but is similarly effective against toxic effects .
Some believe that low doses of synthetic and natural chemicals are actually beneficial , and reduce cancer rates by potentiating defense responses .
In other cases , low doses may lead to a subtle tolerance that is unwanted .
It is believed that the repeated mild exposures to drugs that anesthesiologists are subjected to while performing their functions ( they are frequently in the breathing zone of patients , where intravenously administered drugs are exhaled by the lungs ) may make them more vulnerable to developing drug abuse problems23 .
The decay of a drug ’ s concentration over time may produce a long tail at a concentration that stimulates the proliferation of the surviving cells .
The tumor eradication potential of the drug may be partly attenuated by proliferation stimulation .
Tachyphylaxis designates a rapid decrease in the response to a drug after repeated doses over a short period of time .
General explanations for the phenomenon : depletion of intermediates creating the drug 's effect , or depletion of the drug ’ s receptors in response to their saturation .
The best known examples are from street drugs such as amphetamines , ecstasy and ephedrine .
Action of Caffeine vs Dose Caffeine has never been strictly approved as a pesticide , but it can be used as a 2 % solution to kill frogs .
Caffeine consumption in pregnant women should be limited , to protect developing brains .
When he actually attempted to poison himself , as the Romans were closing in , he failed , and had to die by the sword .
1-20 A tempting view is that all intoxications are basically nonthreshold , but that thresholds are observed experimentally because of lumped reactions that include detoxification mechanisms and hormesis together that add their contributions to the non-threshold curve .
Toxic reactions will develop and repair at different rates , depending on whether the lesion is metabolic , structural , genetic or heritable .
4 - TOXICANT INTERACTIONS Multiple toxicants in combination may have effects unpredictable from their individual actions .
Primarily because of interactions documented in the liver ( cytochrome enzymes ) , it is known that two toxicants can have combined toxic effects that add synergistically ( more than the sum ) , linearly ( the sum ) or antagonistically ( less than the sum ) .
Toxicants that act by generating free radicals or causing cancer , such as dioxins , furans and PCBs are generally assumed to have additive risks , although it is relatively rare that solid data is available to confirm the assumption21 .
Attenuation : increased number of detoxification pumps in the membrane of cells to enhance elimination of low levels of toxicants .
Modeling principles 5 - TIME-COURSE OF TOXIC REACTIONS Toxicodynamics investigates the changes over time in the physiology and structure of an organism as a result of toxicant exposure .
For reasons of ethics and cost , toxicology is heavily dependant on models in securing toxicity data .
While maintaining the representativity of the test , the toxicologist seeks : to use a lower species or test system , to obtain results faster , and at lower cost .
Positive toxicodynamic change : the rise in the level of CYP enzymes in liver cells , to allow faster clearance of a toxicant .
Negative toxicodynamic change : elimination of healthy cells from tissue as a result of necrosis or apoptosis .
1-21 1 – FIND A RELEVANT MODEL The intent of toxicology studies is often to determine Safe Human Doses such that no adverse effect occurs in human subjects .
Because of limits in our knowledge , it is not possible to reliably create toxicological models that exactly determine human toxic thresholds , and the corresponding safe toxicant exposures .
The next best strategy is to use toxicological representations that acknowledge less precision , but that include Safety Factors to compensate for our ignorance .
The following factors contribute to the imprecision of toxicological models .
These simple views do not account for the shared evolutionary history of some species , who may share metabolic characteristics .
Good Animal Models Animal models may need only small adjustments to compensate for inter-species variations .
The mechanism is the same in most mammalian species , but some models are more sensitive than others , ( 2 ) some of the neuropathic conditions in humans attributed to pesticides and solvents are faithfully reproduced in certain animal species .
The adult chicken is a good model for neuropathy from some organophosphorus ester insecticides and hexacarbon .
A- DESPECIATION Species have enough similarities between them to make animal or cellular models from many species acceptable , but it is difficult to certify that the system chosen is appropriate for the determination of a particular toxic threshold .
Anatomical , micro-anatomical and molecular-genetic similarities must be considered in the choice of appropriate models for toxicity testing .
Selected test species should ideally display the same natural diseases , syndromes or toxicities as humans .
Models of tissue cultures , cell cultures , or even biochemical mixtures can meaningfully represent complete living systems only if they are chosen wisely based on previous physiological knowledge .
Most of the differences are quantitative , but in a game of toxic thresholds , these quantitative differences can be important .
Specific variables among a broad range of mammals have been studied .
Poor Animal Models Some animals models may be inappropriate because they lack the biochemical machinery that makes another species vulnerable ( such as the lack of thyroid binding protein in rodents versus humans , see Chapter 10 ) .
Does the test display effects on the most sensitive target within the organism ?
Most tests can find a connection between an exposure and an effect , but is this effect appropriate to determine the acceptable human exposure levels ?
In the absence of complete knowledge , many toxicologists believe that a safety factor of 10 is appropriate to cover this uncertainty .
Smallpox does not have an animal reservoir , and this is why it could be eradicated .
Inter-Species barriers prevented migration of scrapie-like diseases to humans from sheep , but bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( BSE ) did migrate somewhat to mink and humans.These barriers manifest subtle differences between models that look superficially equivalent .
Species variations problems may be overcome by testing in numerous animal species , or by an appropriately chosen single model .
However , the consensus appears to point to an unavoidable imprecision in substituting a model for the real thing , this imprecision being set as a safety factor of 10 in human toxic threshold determinations .
C- CHOOSE APPROPRIATE TEST ENVIRONMENT Once we have selected the proper species for representation of the human toxic threshold , and have decided on the variables to represent such an effect , how do we know that the circumstances under which the tests will be conducted will result in a safe human dose that will guarantee safety ?
Would you have predicted that in some animal models ( but not in others ) the baseline incidence of liver tumors can increase solely as a result of animals being fed a cholinemethionine deficient diet ?
Do we know that , within a given species , we have chosen the most appropriate strain , subspecies or genetic variant for this toxic threshold determination ?
Could our determination be influenced by age , sex , route of entry , the test ’ s environmental parameters or the culture medium in the case of in vitro tests ?
In the absence of complete knowledge , many toxicologists believe that a safety factor of 10 is appropriate to cover this uncertainty .
It has not escaped your attention that all of these limitations of models ( safety factors of 10 ) can weight heavily in the direction of reducing safe human doses to very small values , potentially making them difficult to implement in practice .
B- CHOOSE RELEVANT VARIABLES There are innumerable end-points that can potentially be chosen to quantify toxicity , and finally to determine toxic thresholds ( smallest adverse effect level ) .
They range from death of a subject ( this would be used with extrapolation to lower doses ) to , say , increases in the concentration of ornithine decarboxylase enzyme in cultured cells .
How can we be sure that the toxicity variables we have retained are appropriate to quantify the human toxic threshold , and that , for that matter , our choice of variables was wise in the context of all possible human adverse effects , especially the 1-23 1.2.2.5 .
Low exposures in humans are often simulated by high doses in an animal model , under the assumption that high doses in animals will produce the same toxic reaction as observed at low doses in humans , but with more statistical strength ( binding isotherm view , see Chapter 2 ) .
To reduce the number of animals necessary for a test , while still obtaining robust data , extrapolation from high to low doses is frequently used .
The reliability of toxicity testing therefore often depends on a monotonous relation between the log-of-dose of the agent and the toxic outcome .
Although this assumption is almost universally used , there is substantial evidence that there are significant departures from it , as elevating exposure changes the diseases expressed in a model from the chronic class to the acute class .
If exposure must remain low in the model to conserve mechanisms , can the model itself become more sensitive to reduce testing costs ?
For example , by reducing the reserve of detoxification molecules and antioxidants .
But it is not clear that the effects are equivalent to increasing dose with none of the disadvantages .
This approach may be meaningful for genetic mechanisms , but not necessarily for toxicity generally .
Difficulties of Low-Dose Extrapolation Example of Low-Dose Non-Linearity Ionizing radiation risk is in great part based on health outcomes from the Hiroshima and Nagasaki explosions , and assume that cancer risk is proportional to dose , even at low levels .
In careful experiments , researchers we able to irradiate the nuclei of cells in Petri dishes with one alpha particle each , creating mutations of a specific gene .
Bystander effects due to cell-to-cell communication are thought to account at least in part for the observed nonlinearity14 .
Patterns of toxicant distribution and metabolism differ between low and high doses .
Using high exposures in experiments tends to target the organ with the weakest elimination ( short-term bioaccumulation ) .
This organ then becomes the determinant of the TLV , although it may be the wrong target for chronic exposure .
Defense mechanisms , active at low doses , may be disabled at higher ones .
A low dose may be compensated by normal physiological mechanisms , only a small fraction of the toxicity being expressed in the model , as much of the toxicant is effectively neutralized in a healthy subject .
Many testing procedures in various areas of technology attempt time-saving measures .
In the testing of materials , higher temperature or temperature cycling are often used to increase the aging rate .
In the testing of electrical cable insulation , the frequency of the applied voltage can be increased .
These tactics can not be used in toxicological models .
Biological molecules have limited tolerance to heat and pH .
Choices in Toxicology In the thinking of toxicologists , low-dose extrapolation is thought to amplify the risk because more mechanisms of toxicity are thought to be active at high doses than at low doses .
To the contrary , long-term extrapolation is thought to attenuate the risk because it does not take into account bio-accumulation of agents , or slowly emerging damage .
Compensating one factor with the other , toxicologists often simulate chronic low level exposures in humans using short high level doses in an animal model .
Would an athlete look the same after training forcefully for 6 months as if he took it easy for 3 years ?
Accelerating the passage of Time There are however acceleration methods that are applicable to biological models : increasing the cell cycling ( division ) rate , There is a generally higher susceptibility to toxicants by organisms hosting rapidly dividing cells ( fetus , bone marrow , immune system ) .
Time does not respect what is done without it .
Dose and Time in Toxicity High doses of toxicants generally have rapid effects , whereas effects of lower doses may become detectable only much later .
This makes sense , since many physiological processes accelerate when concentrations increase .
Since acute toxicity determinations are relatively simple , fast and inexpensive , they form relatively little of the ongoing activity in Toxicology .
However , most ( brief ) toxicological tests performed are assumed with relatively little proof to be representative of risks developing over much longer periods .
Within the duration of a A class of natural compounds with considerable acute toxicity are venoms .
The proteins and peptides of venoms act rapidly .
Venoms target the blood and blood vessels , inhibiting clotting and dilating vessels , leading to a loss of blood pressure .
They also target nerves and muscles by acting on calcium , potassium and sodium-channel blockers , as well as sodium-channel activators and prolongers and antagonists of nicotinic and muscarinic receptors .
Venoms are probably derived from the immune system ’ s -defensin molecules , and are usually represented in numerous types within the same animal to maximize effectiveness .
The relationship between level of exposure and time of exposure is quantified by Haber ’ s Law : Toxicity  Potency  ( Concentration  Threshold )  Time where Toxicity quantifies the toxic effect , Potency represents the toxic potency of the agent , Concentration is the concentration of the agent or dose rate , Threshold is the detoxification term , and Time is the duration of agent administration .
According to Haber ’ s Law , any toxic effect is the product of the Potency of the agent , its Time of application and its Concentration minus a penalty term for metabolic detoxification , “ Threshold ” .
Although Haber 's Law is too simple to account for all aspects of toxic reactions ( for example , “ Threshold ” is typically a function of agent concentration , rather than a constant , as we will see in Chapter 4 ) , it explains the assumptions most often used by toxicologists , namely : By contrast , considerable effort is expended on elucidating more subtle effects that occur slowly at lower exposures .
These more common exposures , without being an immediate threat to survival , may produce subtle alterations , with delayed impacts on chronic survival or organ function .
Repeated exposure at low levels may manifest in subtle , chronically developing adverse effects .
Time Integrated Toxicity  Potency Emergence of real risks after some time , or risks merge with general background risks .
This has lead many to use more descriptive and approximate ( as opposed to analytical ) methods 2 .
THE TIME-WEIGHTED AVERAGE METRIC ONLY APPROXIMATES TOXICITY While the assumption that the Area under the Curve is the proper exposure metric to gauge toxic effects , it is obviously true only for slow-acting chemicals with straightforward physiological actions .
There are many known exceptions to this rule .
For example , suppression of the immune system by diesel exhaust fumes is more effective if smaller doses are repeated at intervals than if one large single bolus is administered22 .
In contrast to the case above , most toxicants , if administered in many very small doses as opposed to a single large one , will have negligible effects ( because of the Threshold term in Haber ’ s Law ) .
Time Course of Toxic Reactions Toxic reactions unfold over periods ranging from a minute to a lifetime .
A toxicant reaches various sensitive sites within the body at various moments , and multiple toxic effects from a toxicant can each have secondary consequences .
In some cases , toxicity can be altogether delayed because of the need for bioactivation .
Because of basic as well as size differences , toxicities can also happen at different rates in animal models and in humans .
The “ Area Under the Curve ” in an exposure vs time plot can be used to quantify toxic effects .
Short-term exposure levels ( STELs ) have been added to take into account the more acute effects of exposure .
The acute effects may strike an organ or produce a disease totally unrelated to the one that will become apparent as a result of chronic exposure .
High exposures lead to frank effects on an organism that does not have time to adapt .
Low exposures may barely show any effects until long into the future , with the added complexity that the organism may adapt and age as the test proceeds .
Acute effects are generally well known and chronic effects highly uncertain , because acute tests are cheap , while chronic tests are expensive .
Toxidromes Antidotes are usually given after the patient is stable , preferably within a few hours of ingestion , and may require multiple doses because of short durations of action .
Initial laboratory testing may include bicarbonate level , electrolytes , serum urea nitrogen , and serum creatinine levels to evaluate for renal failure and electrolyte imbalance ; blood glucose levels for hypoglycemic ingestion ; electrocardiography for cardiotoxicity ; prothrombin time for coagulopathy ; pulse oximetry for hypoxia ; serum acetaminophen level for acetaminophen toxicity ; and urine human chorionic gonadotropin levels in female patients of childbearing age .
From the point of view of a victim , acute toxic reactions follow a certain development over time , depending on the poison concerned .
Interpretation can be complicated if multiple substances are involved .
Cell Membrane Toxicity – Minutes Toxic substances released in extracellular fluids rapidly meet cell membranes .
Alterations to the membranes come from altering the state of membrane receptors ( neurotransmission , hormones , cytokines ) , dissolving or altering the lipid matrix , or from binding or cross linking membrane protein .
Such toxicities can be established very rapidly , especially for some agents that are quickly absorbed through the lungs .
Since there are various classes or receptors in the body that could be stimulated in this toxidrome , the symptoms could include any of those described in Table 1.17 .
Cholinergic Toxidrome MUSCARINIC NICOTINIC Pupil contraction Pupil dilatation Slow heartbeat Fast heartbeat Mucus in lung , Bronchodilation obstructed breathing Vomiting , diarrhea High blood pressure Abundant saliva/tears Perspiration Urinary incontinence Weakness ( resp .
CENTRAL Agitation Confusion Lethargy Coma Seizure Death If a specific toxidrome is identified , the physician should consider toxin-specific treatments , such as an antidote .
Cell Metabolism Toxicity - Hours Organic solvents ( ethanol , benzene ) and anesthetics expand lipid membranes and increase their fluidity and permeability .
Oxidation of membrane lipids ( overwhelming the protection provided by glutathione ) occurs from herbicides such as paraquat and diquat and from antibiotics such as adriamycin and bleomycin .
Inside the cell , low calcium concentrations are maintained by sequestering calcium in mitochondria , the smooth endoplasmic reticulum and by protein binding ( to regulators such as calmodulin ) .
Carbon tetrachloride , acetaminophen and tri-n-butyltin are examples of substances that act by releasing calcium within cells , leading to loss of cell functions and cell death ( F1.18 ) .
Metabolism uses external materials to produce living substance : lipids , protein and nucleic acids .
A few metabolic toxicities occur extremely fast , because they target bottlenecks of cell metabolism .
Oxygen deprivation by carbon monoxide suppresses ATP synthesis in the mitochondrion , which can damage the brain within minutes .
Cyanide and H2S also block energy utilization and are extremely fast acting .
Milder reductions of mitochondrial metabolism are obtained from the drugs salycilate and tetracycline .
Extensive studies have been done on the reaction of mitochondria to a variety of toxicants ( T1.20 ) .2 Typically , metabolic toxicity develops a little more slowly than in the extreme examples above , as ( 1 ) blocking one pathway usually leaves alternatives for cells to compensate with , and ( 2 ) cells usually have some reserve which allows them to pull through brief episodes of intoxication .
Many components of cells nevertheless need to be replaced , as they wear out though normal metabolism .
For example , RNA is synthesized and replaced in cells approximately every day .
The dark circles are calcium transporters .
2 About 1 in 5,000 women have mitochondrial mutations that lead to fatal disorders that affect the muscles and the brain .
They are passed from mother to child , as mitochondria are maternally inherited .
During in vitro fertilization , it is possible to move the nucleus of an egg to the cytoplasm of an egg with healthy mitochondria .
Any substance toxic to the mitotic apparatus will display cell proliferation toxicity .
Methotrexate , an anticancer drug which inhibits DNA replication , is not toxic to cells in the resting phase , but is highly toxic to proliferating cells .
This is why people undergoing chemotherapy are subject to hair loss , digestive problems and low blood counts .
Any compound able to alter cell proliferation rate is a potential teratogen , as the shaping of embryos is critically dependant on speed of cell division .
Changes in Mitochondria caused by Toxic substances .
Cell Oncogenicity - Years Long-term experiments on toxicity teach us that the longer you study toxicity , the more surprises there are .
Cancer is known as “ a multiple step process ” , and these steps typically do not all occur within a very short period of time .
Even after a tumor cell is created , functionally significant tumors need to grow in order to affect the organism , and be detectable .
In rat models , this period of cancer development is compressed within a year .
20 21 22 Control ( no exposure ) Methotrexate Elongation Condensed Twisted Oligomycin Swollen 20,25-diazacholesterol Enlarged matrix granule Isonicotinic acid hydrazide Swollen , collapsed cristae Sodium fluoride Asteroid inclusions Diethylenetriaminetetraacetic Aggregated matrix granules acid Puromycin Vesicular cristae Acetone Outer membrane blebs Fluoroacetate Perpendicular stacks of cristae Iodoacetate Dense matrix Ouabain Mineral granule accumulation Cyanide Branching Excess ferric ion Ring formation Excess calcium ion Nesting cup formation Dicyclohexylcarbodiimide Coagulated matricial protein Clear matricial area with tail Actinomycin D formation Puromycin Disruption Ouabain Mineral granule accumulation Cadmium ion Scalloped outer margin Mitochondria are former bacteria , and many antibiotics can lead to mitochondrial failure through Reactive Oxygen Species generation .
1-30 In New Guinea , the central nervous system disease called “ kuru ” ( connected with mad cow and Creutzfeld-Jacob diseases ) was related to the practice of ritual cannibalism that included the eating of human brains , which was banned in the late 1950s .
Scope of Toxicological Data A rounded approach to evaluating toxic risks includes : physical and chemical characterization of the toxicant , in vitro studies , in vivo studies , and epidemiology .
The types of studies chosen and how they are performed will depend on the intent of the toxicity study .
Because of cost , acute ( short ) studies tend to be available in the literature and reasonably well standardized , while chronic ( long ) studies tend to be few , with more variation in the methods .
The evidence available for any toxic agent has accumulated over a period of time , consequently the historical changes in methods and emphasis bring unexpected diversity to an agent ’ s file .
The most inexpensive way to assess the toxicity of a chemical is to do a literature review .
For example , a review of accidental or suicidal intoxications and of occupational exposures may allow recognition of the acute hazards of the agent .
Such models are well controlled , but there is a problem in extrapolation from the various models to human cases .
1-31 Some in vitro experiments are highly relevant to cancer risks ( cell proliferation studies , genetic determinations ) , while computer modeling may be important to compartmentalization ( solubility and Toxicokinetics ) and gross assessment of toxicity .
The contributions of computer modeling and in vitro studies are primarily in confirming and documenting basic effects and mechanisms .
Systematic efforts are being made to expand the scope of these studies to provide more complete information relevant to human risks .
Chronic animal experiments are very useful in assessing teratogenic and cancer risks .
On the other hand , when epidemiological studies are performed using environments very similar to those that are of interest , their conclusions can be very revealing of real human risks .
Availability of Toxicity Information Toxicology will not become decrepit for lack of new chemicals , added at a rate of 36,000 new chemicals to the Chemical Abstracts Service database every day… Some 65,000 basic chemicals are used in industry to create 5 million compound products .
Most of them have been in use for many decades .
These grandfather chemicals cause most of the problems .
All experimental studies have in common the difficulty of establishing appropriate levels of exposure for tests .
Doses are larger for acute studies than for chronic ones , and there is always a risk in a chronic study of being “ off the mark ” due to improper dosing .
In 1976 , the US Toxic Substances Control Act established that 60,000 chemicals would be `` grandfathered '' , and that the Environmental Protection Agency would be responsible to perform scattered tests on 100 chemicals , and to restrict the use of 7 % of the chemicals introduced until 1979 .
This situation has arisen due to : the absence of demands for testing , the lack of adequate testing protocols , the large numbers of chemicals introduced since the 1950s .
The usefulness of many epidemiological studies is limited by two factors : ( 1 ) the duration and level of exposure : retrospective studies of worker health typically involve complex exposures , for example as a result of particularities in industrial processes and as occupational health and safety regulations change over the years , ( 2 ) the simultaneous exposure to a mixture of agents , leading to a difficulty in attributing observed health effects to any individual component .
Most of the chemicals in use will have some information on acute toxicity , but virtually none on reproductive toxicity , teratogenicity or carcinogenicity .
For Cadmium and Hexavalent chromium , there must be less than 0.01 % of the substance by weight at raw homogeneous materials .
Any RoHS compliant component must have 100 ppm or less of mercury , and the mercury must not have been intentionally added to the component .
One may derive the impression , from the above , that there is never enough toxicity information .
For toxicological science , it would be desirable to have complete results on all substances .
However , after the understanding that the gathering of all potentially useful information is impossibly expensive , the focus shifts to gathering information of good quality and to obtaining the relevant information ( as opposed to the superfluous ) .
Only a quarter of the 82,000 chemicals in use in the US have been tested for toxicity .
They are tested only if 1-33 The strategy is to perform only the tests that need to be done to recognize health risks .
A major task of experimental toxicologists is therefore to determine what data is critical to safety , and how this data should be interpreted .
A vital aspect of resource use in toxicology is the use of broad assumptions to qualify categories of chemicals , essentially removing them from expensive experimentation lists because some information is available on similar or connected substances .
Although such inferences are not always correct and can lead to spectacular errors , Toxicology often plays the differential science card , avoiding costly experimentation based on acceptance that substances closely related in their physical and chemical properties may share similar toxicity .
An important line of defense is vigilance on the part of occupational physicians , hygienists , toxicologists and workers themselves , which has contributed significantly to identifying overt as well as covert hazards .
The reinvestigation of particular chemicals is frequently driven by a chance observation , a bizarre effect on an exposed individual , or an epidemic intoxication .
In the introductory chapter to a New York Academy of Sciences volume `` celebrating '' the passage of 200 years since Percival Pott 's paper linking soot with scrotal cancer in chimney sweeps , Wagoner made a critical observation16 .
Despite the fact that we know about occupational carcinogenicity associated with coal and oil combustion products , radioactivity , inorganic arsenic , aromatic amines , asbestos , etc. , we still have workers exposed to these agents , and they are dying at rates far higher that the normal population .
What has been accomplished in these 200 years , if excess exposures still occur ?
There is little concern about many of these chemicals , because they have been in use for a long time and are widely distributed .
Often , the agent is not connected to the disease , or the disease is difficult to diagnose .
Reliability of Toxicity Information Agreement among experts is not always a guarantee of safety .
Toxicology , for practical reasons , is more sensitive to toxicities that have obvious manifestations , and that develop over the short term .
Many sciences suffer from this vulnerability : microbiology is biased towards the study of organisms that proliferate well in current culture media , and chemistry favors molecules that are easy to isolate , and are conveniently stable .
Consider the uranium miners from East Germany and their lung cancers resulting from poor to negligible occupational health practices during decades17 .
Lung cancer and disease killed at least 20,000 miners out of a workforce of 450,000 as a consequence of exposure to radiation and dusts .
Neurotoxicity can be severe and debilitating , with a large numbers of workers at risk .
When new deleterious effects are detected , we often find that they spring from a new 1-34 chemicals are associated with diverse neurological signs and symptoms , resulting in peripheral and central nervous system damage18 .
T1.23.INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS IN SOME EEC COUNTRIES FOR NOTIFICATION AND HAZARD ASSESSMENT OF NEW CHEMICALS IDENTITY OF THE SUBSTANCE Name Names in the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry nomenclature Other names ( usual name , trade name , abbreviation ) Chemical Abstracts Service number ( if available ) Empirical and structural formula Composition of the substance Degree of purity ( % ) Nature of impurities , including isomers and by-products Percentage of ( significant ) main impurities If the substance contains a stabilizing agent or an inhibitor or other additives , specify : nature , order of magnitude : .
Regulations on Toxicity Information Public and worker concerns , encouraged by the media , are demanding more information about chemicals manufactured or imported , distributed across the country by rail , truck or ship , used in various industries , in the home and garden , and disposed of when no longer needed .
National and international regulatory agencies are requiring more extensive data for each chemical entering the marketplace ( T1.23 ) .
Under current Canadian , US and OECD/EC regulatory requirements , new chemicals must be accompanied by a basic package of certain toxicity tests ( varying with the volume being imported or manufactured per year ) .
The list below is the information requirement for countries of the European Community .
Also included at the end of this table is information concerning disposal of the agent , designed both for industry and the individual user , in keeping with the `` cradle-to-grave '' responsibility of industries for their products .
Emergency measures in the case of accidental spillage Emergency measures in the case of injury to persons ( e.g .
poisoning ) TOXICOLOGICAL STUDIES Acute toxicity Substances other than gases shall be administered via two routes at least one of which should be the oral route .
The other route will depend on the intended use and on the physical properties of the substance .
Gases and volatile liquids should be administered by inhalation ( a minimum period of administration of four hours ) in all cases , observation of the animals should be carried out for at least 14 days .
Unless there are contraindications , the rat is the preferred species for oral and inhalation experiments .
The experiments shall be carried out on both male and female subjects .
including in the organs Skin irritation  The substance should be applied to the shaved skin of an animal , preferably an albino rabbit .
Eye irritation  The rabbit is the preferred animal  Duration of exposure in hours Skin sensitization  To be determined by a recognized method using a guinea pig Sub-acute toxicity ( 28 days )  Effects observed on the animal and organs according to the concentrations used , including clinical and laboratory investigations  Dose for which no toxic effect is observed  A period of daily administration ( five to seven days per week ) for at least four weeks should be chosen .
The route of administration should be the most appropriate having regard to the intended use , the acute toxicity and the physical and chemical properties of the substance .
Unless there are contra-indications , the rat is the preferred species for oral and inhalation experiments .
COMPONENT PARTS OF THE MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEETS SECTION I .
Hazardous Ingredients Ingredients with ACGIH , OSHA TLVs PELs and CAS no .
Spill or Leak procedures Spill control : how to do it , and what with .
Material Safety Data Sheets Much of the information above can be incorporated into the standardized Material Safety Data Sheet .
The MSDS is a complete , up-to-date set of information for each product that a company manufactures or uses which , by law , must be available at all times in the Health or Safety office .
The US Occupational Health and Safety Agency requires MSDSs for at least 600 chemicals .
Companies are not required to perform tests , but to list what they know , including : 1-37 pharmacy of a hospital , with little training and no full time staff .
There has been a tendency since the 1970s to reduce the number of poison centers and to provide them with better trained staff .
The most used databases for poison centers are POISINDEX , DRUGDEX , TOMES and TOXNET .
the ingredients and quantities in the formulation , the physicochemical properties of each ingredient , the safety procedures and emergency first aid treatments , a section ( Section V ) dealing with toxicity data .
A quick review of most MSDSs reveals rather limited toxicity information .
For example , TOXNET is a computer system run by the National Library of Medicine that includes a number of toxicological databases managed by the Environmental Protection Agency , the National Cancer Institute , and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health .
For more specific information , go to http : //www.toxnet.nlm.nih.gov The delayed effects are usually more sparingly documented , even if , for certain classes of chemicals ( halogenated hydrocarbon solvents , pesticides ) , the delayed toxicity is of greater concern .
Any longer term ( subchronic ) toxicity test is generally also in the form of a rodent study .
The MSDS database is essential because workers can be exposed accidentally to chemicals during manufacture , transportation , and ultimate use .
Poisoning Databases Acute toxicity studies can go far beyond the determination of the LD50 , for example into the measures needed to manage acute poisonings in humans .
The first emergency centers were created in 1949 in Copenhagen and Budapest .
Information became systematized and computerized more thoroughly in the 1950s , when centers aimed at pediatric and general population poisonings started to grow .
Most were operated as part of the emergency or For example , HSDB contains chemical-specific information on : manufacturing and use , 1-38 chemical and physical properties , safety and handling , toxicity and biomedical effects , pharmacology , environmental fate and exposure potential , exposure standards and regulations , monitoring and analysis methods , and additional references .
It delivers in extremely abbreviated form the results of 45 toxicity studies for benzene , a real time-saver when doing research work .
Anyone wishing information about an agent has access to Internet resources , and may take the time to read basic research articles .
Toxicologists in Society What do toxicologists do ?
They can be involved in the protection of workers ( Occupational Health ) or of the general population ( Public Health ) .
They perform tests in laboratories ( research and development , evaluation of test results ) , risk analysis ( literature reviews ) and develop policy and regulations for government or corporations .
Of course , toxicologists may also pursue academic careers in universities .
REFERENCES They may serve on committees determining Safe Human Doses or product safety and labeling regulations .
Inherent toxicity of aggregates implies a common mechanism for protein misfolding diseases .
Stimulating Research to Improve the Scientific Basis of Risk Assessment .
Hormesis ; dose dependent reverse effects of low and very low doses .
Enhanced induction of lymphokine-activated killer activity following a single dose of cisplatin in cancer patients .
In vitro stimulation of human granulocytes and lymphocytes by pico- and fentogram quantities of cytostatic agents .
Drug-like properties and the causes of poor solubility and poor permeability .
Journal of Pharmacological and Toxicological Methods .
The olfactory receptor gene superfamily of the mouse .
Radiation risk to low fluences of [ alpha ] particles may be greater than we thought .
Strategies to Determine Needs and Priorities .
Occupational carcinogenesis : the two hundred years since Percival Pott .
Suppression of cell-mediated immune responses to Listeria infection by repeated exposure to diesel exhaust Environmental toxicologists are concerned with the persistence of chemicals in the environment , food chain accumulation and with the consequences of toxicants to the biota .
They may be involved in public relations , in scientific writing for the public and in legal proceedings , as expert witnesses .
Removing the threat of diclofenac to critically endangered Asian vultures .
Effects of ultra low concentrations of endosulfan on California amphibians .
Third National Report on Human Exposures to Environmental Chemicals .
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention .
Kuru in the 21st century—an acquired human prion disease with very long incubation periods .
Phylogenetically Informed Analysis of the Allometry of Mammalian Basal Metabolic Rate Supports Neither Geometric Nor Quarter-Power Scaling .
Hormesis Outperforms Threshold Model in National Cancer Institute Antitumor Drug Screening Database .
Summary of the Toxicology of CE in Humans .
Extrapolation of the Animal and Human Data .
Safe Human Dose Threshold Model using Noncancer Animal Data .
Safe Human Dose Threshold Model using Noncancer Human Data .
Summary of the Estimates of Risk .
Complexity of Toxic Effects All toxic agents have multiple effects occurring at different doses , and within specific time intervals , as shown in F2.1 .
A critical decision in the practice of Risk Assessment is focusing on one or a few toxicity variables to estimate the Safe Human Dose .
Which critical toxicity variable or disease rate is most affected by the agent , and to what extent should exposure be limited to protect human or animal health ?
Significant vs Trivial Risks Protective limits for an agent should take into account its lowest-dose significant risk .
The decision of which risk to retain as significant is one that must be made on the basis of the deepest knowledge of physiology and epidemiology available .
Perhaps the greatest weakness of Risk Assessment is that its view is limited by the evidence available .
It is impractical to test all body systems in sufficient detail to dispel all doubts about the safety of an agent .
Extensive data for a particular toxicity variable or test system may be available simply because a laboratory was funded to conduct the research , or because the measurement is convenient or inexpensive ( ex , Ames test ) .
The toxicologist aims to compensate for these biases , looking to obtain from restricted evidence a toxicity determination that is as comprehensive as possible .
Low-Dose Toxic Effects The appreciation of the full toxicity of an agent often proceeds historically through a series of successive discoveries .
But it is relatively recent knowledge that at doses of 7 ppm in water , it leads to narrowing of the carotid artery1 and that it can act as an endocrine disruptor3,5 .
Further , it interferes with the action of glucocorticoids at an environmental concentration of 10 ppb .
More subtle toxic effects are often uncovered over time .
If biological exposure indices such as blood or plasma levels are available , this helps to make comparisons between studies more enlightening , particularly if the targets of the toxicant are known .
An important practical problem is that Safe Human Doses are intended to limit lifetime exposures , while few laboratory studies ever provide this time frame .
Epidemiology often provides a more chronic perspective than experiments , but typically its results are much more difficult to interpret .
On a linear scale , the relative changes occurring at low values would be obscured , compressed in the early part of the graph .
One gets quite a different impression about the evolution of the economy , according to the axial metric chosen .
Tox File Diversity The diversity of scientific knowledge can become an obstacle to obtaining a clear assessment of risk .
Some studies often promote particular interests and methods , and high political stakes often tend to disintegrate a unified picture of risk .
This can give the impression of an absence of coherence or reliability in science .
The real problem is that risk is itself fairly complex in that it can apply to different organs , populations and situations .
It is therefore often difficult to come to a single limit that will satisfy all points of view .
Often the Safe Human Dose will be determined by focusing on a few strategically chosen studies .
Note the following about log scales .
-A log scale displays normal number labels that are positioned according to a log scale .
The grids along the log scale change abruptly from intervals of 10 to intervals of 100 , for example .
Toxicology uses specific conventions in its choice of graph axes , and these conventions can be justified using MichaelisMenten kinetics or statistical arguments , as we shall see later in this chapter .
The graphic conventions ( log axes ) used in Toxicology are set to ease detection of specific dependencies anticipated from experimental results .
The Choice of Graphs The choice of graphic representations for toxicity data as a function of dose is important because graphs have a suggestive influence .
One frequently quoted motive to use logarithmic axes is to view more clearly data spanning a very wide 2-3 Do not let tricky graphs cloud your thinking about problems they are intended to illuminate .
Obtaining a “ proper ” relation gives the experimenter or the epidemiologist confidence that his data is sound .
However , this frequently observed curve type is not the only one possible , as was shown by the class of chemical known as “ endocrine disruptors ” 10 , for example , and one should be prepared to accept unusual dose-response dependencies .
Agents can be more toxic at lower doses than at higher ones , as can be seen in T2.2a and F2.2a .
Unusual Dose-Responses , and an illustration of how the Risk could be erroneously assessed .
So , if an unusual dependency is found , one must look hard at the data to determine if the relation is the result of artefacts or of true physiology .
Therefore , epidemiologists scrutinizing large populations are less likely to observe them than laboratory experimenters .
8 Electromagnetic Radiation Calcium efflux in nerve cells is stimulated within an intensity window only .
7 Emphasis on documentation of the dose-response tends to obscure other aspects of toxicity , specifically : whether the outcome variable chosen is the most relevant one to determine a Safe Human Dose for the agent , the influence of time : most tests are too short ( to conserve resources ) , thereby blinding the testing process to the 2-4 concentration or total dosage ) is required to obtain half of the maximum effect ( efficacy = 0.5 ) is commonly used to derive a measure of toxicant potency .
A drug that requires a lower dose than another drug to obtain the same half-maximum effect is therefore considered to be more potent .
Generally , body burden is also expressed as an absolute mass of substance .
Spread Some dose-response curves are very steep , while others need larger changes of dosage for the same change in toxic effect .
Statistical Dispersion If a group of animals in a laboratory study is given exactly the same dose of a chemical , the response from each animal will be at least slightly different .
The efficacy of an agent relates to the maximum effect that it can produce at any concentration ( see F2.8 ) .
Often , it is also appropriate to express the efficacy of an agent by comparing it to the maximum effect that can be obtained on a living system by the most effective chemical known .
There is also an uncertainty as to the dose actually received by each animal .
For example , in the example above , the toxicant may be mixed with food , and each animal does not eat exactly the same amount .
In laboratory studies , the inaccuracy in the  Drug expiration dates specify the manufacturer ’ s guarantee of full potency and safety .
It is safe to take drugs past their expiration dates .
So , if your life depends on an expired drug and you must have 100 % of its original strength , you should toss it , but if not , use it and see what happens .
Potency An agent ’ s efficacy tells us something about its maximum effect , but not about how much of the agent is needed to obtain a given effect .
Even in the case where the outcome is rated as all-or-nothing , such as presence of cancer , the number of animals used in any given study limits the reliability of the probability of getting cancer , particularly if the risk is small .
Although laboratory experimenters mostly attempt to reduce the dispersion in their data by keeping tight control over animals ( to the point of using animal clones ) and test conditions , dispersions in toxicity reactions are part of the data , if the data is to be relevant to a complex environment .
In epidemiological studies , there are uncertainties associated with gathering data from populations , and also uncertainties in the estimates of their exposures .
Therefore , obtaining data dispersions representative of realworld situations may be legitimate objectives in laboratory experiments as well as in epidemiological investigations .
If we perform the experiment repeatedly at various doses , we can obtain dose responses such as in F2.4 .
This assumes the same toxic slope at all levels of toxicity .
2-6 In this simple model , an infinite dose is needed to kill all the cells .
The inactivation of membrane receptors is an example , because they are usually available in larger number than necessary .
Toxicity emerges at the toxicant concentration where the remaining active receptor proteins are required for cell survival or function .
The plant toxin ricin follows a retrograde transport route : from cell surface to endosomes to the Golgi complex , to the endoplasmic reticulum and finally the cytosol , where it binds to and inactivates ribosomal RNA , thereby inhibiting protein synthesis .
A single ricin molecule entering the cytosol can inactivate over 1,500 ribosomes per minute , and kill the cell .
This neutralization would shift the dose-response curves to the right .
Toxicant to Receptor Binding Increasing the stimulation on a physiological system generally produces climbing curves that saturate at higher doses .
2-7 When toxicants interact with biological receptors , binding follows the law of mass action .
The equation below describes the reversible binding of toxicant to receptor , quantified by binding and dissociation constants ( Kx ) .
This curve is the expected form of toxicity relationships between log of dose and continuous toxicity variables , if compatible with simple receptor-ligand kinetics .
An estimate of the amount of the toxicant that produces a 50 % response is obtainable from the data points that contribute to the estimation of this central slope .
Deviations from this form signal that more complex phenomena contribute to toxicity .
These curves could be perceived as showing a threshold or not , depending on the range of dose chosen for the experiment .
The result is illustrated in the lower curve of F2.8 , showing that two binding steps reduce the efficacy of the reaction .
100 90 80 In laboratory tests , the toxicologist almost always prefers to evaluate groups of animals or cells , basically because all animals or cells do not behave identically .
In epidemiology , differences between human subjects lead to the determination of probabilities , as opposed to certainties .
To protect toxicological results against individual variations , a statistically significant sample of animals or cells is needed for testing .
This plurality of tests objects is almost universally implemented , often according to budget limitations , even if no a priori information is available on the variability of the toxicity investigated .
If one rolls one die repeatedly , the values 1,2,3,4,5,6 will come out the same number of times , resulting in a flat histogram .
Increasing number of binding steps reduces Efficacy .
The Central Tendency Theorem says that if we average more and more independent random quantities that have a common distribution ( and if that common distribution is not too pathological ) , then the distribution of their means approaches a Gaussian .
Departures from this Gaussian ( normal ) probability distribution suggests that special variables are strong determinants of toxicity .
The variability within toxicant targets widens the spread of dose-response curves with respect to those obtainable from the simplest experimental systems .
Therefore , the physiology lab working on simple systems should display narrower spreads than those observed in epidemiology , or in groups of animals .
However , whether dealing with a continuous variable or threshold expression of toxicity in a group , in the physiology lab or in epidemiology , dose-responses are likely to display similar shapes over a log scale .
In order to obtain extreme values of toxicity sensitivity , either low or high , all 5 variables must contribute extreme characteristics , while more moderate thresholds can be obtained using many more possible combinations of the individual variables .
The normal distribution that applies to the dies ( F2.9 ) also applies to integrated toxicity , if a sufficiently large number of factors determine toxicity outcome .
If integrated toxicity is normally distributed with respect to dose , few animals exhibit toxicity at extreme doses , while many show toxicity at intermediate values ( dose of 500 , as shown by the red line in F2.10 ) .
Further , if we graph the two previous curves over a log abscissa , we obtain the Gaussian response graph in F2.11 .
Probit Scale An effort has been made to straighten completely the curve obtained from randomly determined ( Gaussian ) toxicity dependencies over dose .
In this procedure , the proportion of subjects responding to each dose is transformed using a computed table into a number called a probit .
The table is built assuming that the experimental events are distributed exactly according to a Gaussian .
The graph of probit against log of dose often produces points that are linear over a wide region of dose in actual experiments ( F2.12 ) .
The processes of linearization used in toxicology allow for easier quantitative assessment of experimental results , and also facilitate the detection of extraneous contributions within simple results , as deviations from a straight line .
Example 1 : Rat Ileum 1000 Log of Dose F2.13 shows continuous dose-responses with administration of various concentrations of two drugs in the guinea pig ileum .
These curves have a shape similar to the binding curves displayed previously .
Log scaling of Gaussian toxicity distribution .
Example 2 : Cancer in Rats One common task in toxicology is to assess what proportion of test animals will show a response at various strengths of exposure .
Cumulative curves similar to the ones in F2.13 can be documented for rat carcinogenicity .
These curves are similar to the Gaussian response curves displayed previously .
As might be expected , a number a parameters can be adjusted within the mathematical expressions of the theoretical doseresponse characteristics displayed previously , to fit experimental data .
Observations cover the full range of 10-90 % spreads discussed theoretically in the earlier sections .
Acetylcholine and propionycholine in the rat ileum .
Components of Risk Assessment Some definitions… The “ HAZARD ” produced by an agent is the injury that will occur as a result of exposure .
Risk Assessment is made of components often occurring in succession .
This low risk is attributed because they are considered to be unsuspecting and naïve potential victims .
The aim is to collect all relevant human , animal and in vitro studies of toxicity .
Abstracted databases such as Sax ’ s Dangerous Properties of Industrial Materials can be invaluable in such work .
and the effects produced can be developed in order to establish : A risk of 1 in 100,000 is considered acceptable for general patients receiving drugs , since they are expected to get a benefit from the drugs they are using .
A risk of 1 in 10,000 is considered acceptable in workplace safety , since the subjects earn a salary , are likely aware of the exposure , and make the production of all goods possible .
the animal species or in vitro system most representative of humans for the endpoints of toxicity retained , and the dosage range and the shape ( linear , convex , concave ) of the dose-response relationship .
A risk of 1 in 1,000 is considered acceptable for patients that are victims of life-threatening diseases , since drug administration may represent their only chance for survival .
Risk Quantification : integration of hazard and exposure quantification into an estimation of the adverse effects likely to occur in a given population , including data uncertainties .
It is not uncommon that risks associated with certain agents need to be updated due to new evidence or new analysis of old evidence .
One of the most powerful methods of manipulating risk quantification is by expert assessment of publications , establishing the relative credibility of specific studies ( expert assessment can be biased ) .
If the dosage range used in animal studies is different from that encountered in exposed humans , there is need to extrapolate to the human situation .
This will include air , water , soil , food analysis , the nature and size of potentially exposed populations , the duration of exposure ( usually in the past ) , the routes by which the agent might be acquired .
Risk Setting : One of the issues in risk assessment is how acceptable risk levels are decided .
There are standardized levels of risk that attempt to balance the acceptable risk with a particular situation .
The new standard regulates separately general industry , construction , and shipyards in order to tailor requirements to the unique circumstances found in each of these sectors .
The new standard reduces the risk posed to workers to the maximum extent that is technologically and economically feasible .
Legal exposure limits reduce risks to levels that are considered acceptable by the standards of the time .
If there is conflict , such as in a court case , all background data is usually shared between parties as documents are tabled .
From the same information , the parties then develop their interpretation , and attempt to sway the tribunal in their favor .
If the controversy gets into the media , and it will , if it is contentious , your interpretation of the potential hazard should be presented rationally and convincingly .
Risk Decision : The weighing of policy alternatives to accept , minimize or reduce risks , and to select and implement appropriate options .
Risk decision may involve , for example , implementation of protective measures within an industrial plant .
If you are a member of a national committee , it may involve settling for a value of the Threshold Limit Value .
Types of Evidence used in Risk Assessment .
Human or mammalian cells and tissues .
2-16 This means that below some concentration of exposure , no toxic effect will be detected or detectable .
” Strength of Evidence ” Criteria To confirm that associations are causal between agent tested and the effect found , we use “ Strength of Evidence ” criteria .
Strength of toxic reaction : a strong toxic effect is less likely than a weak one to be due to baseline noise in an animal model or to uncontrolled factors ( that also unwittingly influence the toxic reaction studied ) .
While it is not necessary that the dose-response follows a classic curve , data points along the dose curve should support , rather than discredit each other .
Consistency : toxicities are most convincing when they can be observed across species ( despeciation ) , and when they can be confirmed using many laboratory techniques or toxicity indicators .
Plausibility : is there basic molecular knowledge that can explain the toxicity data observed ?
Is an alternate explanation for the observations possible ?
Compatibility : are the new toxicity observations compatible with existing knowledge , or do they leave us with an incompatibility with the established databases ?
FEL : the frank effect level , where most of the individuals demonstrate the anticipated toxic effect .
but which are not considered detrimental to general wellbeing .
NOEL : the no observed effect level - a dosage administered that has no measurable effect on the test individuals , the subjects looking and behaving ( both physiologically and biochemically ) exactly like the controls .
This parameter is not easily obtained from studies , the lowest dosage given usually producing a NOAEL or LOAEL .
This addresses the problem that the threshold observed represents uncertain toxicity .
One may also use fractions , say 250 or 500 fold , depending upon your assessment of the quality of the information available .
The result of the computation represents a Safe Human Dose , an acceptable level of exposure or concentration via the normal human absorption route .
Safety Factors Under the assumption of a threshold relationship for toxicity , a low-toxicity level is quantified from experiments , yielding one or more of the above parameters : NOEL , NOAEL or LOAEL , in decreasing order of preference .
A committee of the National Academies of Science pored over 50 years of data on survivors and descendents of survivors of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomic bomb attacks , as well as accumulated data from dozens of studies on exposures to workers in the nuclear industry and other high-exposure sites .
In the past , the nuclear industry and some independent experts have suggested that a safe low threshold for radiation exposure exists .
To put that number in context , 42 other that the human may be up to 10-fold more sensitive than the animal species in which the study was done ( interspecies difference ) , and that there may be a 10-fold range in sensitivity between the very young , the adult and the elderly within any human population ( intra-species difference ) .
If a NOEL can not be obtained from the dose-response relationship , then the assessor may work with a NOAEL or 2-17 lifetime cases of cancer can be expected in that same population of 100 , due to such factors as smoking , environmental toxins or other influences .
The impact of such conclusions related to one of the most tightly documented agents , ionizing radiation , could have impacts on Toxicology as a whole .
The +2 value can be statistically determined from the experimental data .
Assessors typically use two or more of these starting points , obtaining multiple scenarios , and finally choosing among them later on .
The use of linear models for the assessment of carcinogen hazards arose from early work on radiation , where effects on cells were expected to relate linearly to particle emissions detected by Geiger counters ( 1940 's - 1950 's ) .
This concept was transferred in toto to mutagenic chemicals , which did not emit anything , but could be shown to interact with nucleic acids at relatively low concentrations .
It is easy to draw straight lines , but the exact relation between dose and effect at low doses is usually a matter of speculation , because of the lack of reliable experimental results .
People and assessors naturally get very nervous when they suspect that they might be underestimating risks .
To this end , complicated and sophisticated models based on a variety of toxicological assumptions have been developed .
Such a level would go undetected by routine epidemiology , eliminating the scenario where human deaths could be proven from anything but the most sophisticated examination of health files .
This means that there is residual risk as long as there is any exposure .
There has been a recent trend in the USA in particular to unify cancer risk assessment with other risk assessment techniques , resulting in a Unified Safe Human Dose approach for carcinogens and non-carcinogens .
Environmental Limits vs Occupational Limits The U.S. EPA , in seeking to protect general populations from carcinogens , tolerates cancer rates of 1/1,000,000 to 1/10,000 for most of their guidelines .
The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration , in accomodating economic feasibility , puts workers at much higher risk than EPA , as shown in the Table below ( highest EPA risk is 0.1/1000 workers ) .
Beyond the normal Safety Factors classically applied , such as : Excess Cancers per 1000 workers at OSHA Permissible Exposure Level need to extrapolate from animal tests to humans , and existence of sensitive individuals , Ethylene Oxide Asbestos Benzene Formaldehyde Methylenedianiline Cadmium 1,3 Butadiene Methylene Chloride Chromium VI the following factors are commonly considered : exposure of children ( Reproductive Toxicology ) , limited availability of chronic data , and any special “ modifying factors ” .
The Safe Human Dose for the carcinogen would be obtained as LED10 / 10,000 or other safety factor .
Integration of Multiple Exposures Philosophical differences between risk assessment methods become apparent when integrating effects of multiple agents .
Both of the integrations above assume no interactions between the individual agents .
“ When an activity raises threats of harm to human health or the environment , precautionary measures should be taken even if some cause and effect relationships are not fully established scientifically. ” In effect , the Precautionary Principle shifts the burden of proof away from the protection advocates and towards industry .
It also dictates the approach when evidence is lacking or is inconclusive .
The Precautionary Principle might have effects soon in influencing the inclusion of new chemicals on the UN ’ s list of Persistent Organic Polluants ( POPs ) .
At one extreme , the public requires zero risk , an impossibility in this day and age , when our analytical capabilities can measure minute ( ppt , ppq ) amounts of contaminants .
In the public 's psychology , if the agent has a concentration number , it should not be there , no matter how small the number may be .
Such an attitude is difficult to reconcile with technological feasibility .
However , the notion that risks attendant to various agents are discovered by science after exposure has occurred is very strong in the public ’ s eye , and partly justified .
Toxicology vs Risk Assessment The procedures of toxicology , with standardized tests and hopefully careful inferences , are perceived as more scientific than the deliberations of Risk Assessment .
Managers and politicians may place public interest behind self-interest 1 - The lack of information creates opportunity for individuals to devise models , even quantitative models , that are susceptible to political influence .
As incomplete science meets a demand for decisions , small segments of science can be given too much importance .
Although we need to protect human health , the efforts that we marshal to protect it should not create more grief than the problems we are trying to solve .
To strike a balance , objectivity is necessary , or perhaps more accurately , adoption of a point of view that balances the interests of everyone .
The cost of safety vs the desire for zero risk .
All scientific work is incomplete-whether it be observational or experimental .
All scientific work is liable to be upset or modified by advancing knowledge .
That does not confer upon us a freedom to ignore the knowledge we already have , or to postpone the action that it appears to demand at a given time .
( Bradford Hill ) Gold standards of objectivity are hard to attain in difficult questions .
In the distant past , objectivity was thought to issue from social position or high education .
Today , the need for impartiality incites the use of more resources ( committees ) and technical means such as statistics ( vs vague statements ) and images ( vs drawing or recounts ) to enhance credibility .
Restoring coherence can be done by arbitrarily weighing the importance of data , giving more credibility to some , less to others , while still ignoring others entirely .
The choices may depend on how hazards and risks are perceived .
Selection of scientific data can be used to support hidden economic and political agendas .
Quantitative methods help , but they must be used adequately to produce the best results .
4 - Canada has viewed asbestos as a natural resource for decades , and is still exporting large amounts of asbestos to poor countries in Asia .
The recipients of profits have little incentive to objectively examine their products for adverse health consequences .
It was cheap , effective , persistent in the 2-21 environment and made a significant dent in the world incidence of malaria .
It was applied in large quantities to cotton crops .
But western public mood changed when unexpected environmental toxicities were found .
Some concerned the fragilization of the eggs of wild birds , particularly the bald eagle , a sensitive subject in the US , where DDT was banned in 1971 .
Today , DDT is still surrounded in controversy , particularly because developing countries have not found inexpensive substitutes .
Whether DDT is acceptable could be decided using mountains of specific toxicity data .
But the matter is even more easily settled depending on whether your country is currently infested by mosquitoes and malaria .
There are at least 300 million acute cases of malaria each year , with more than a million deaths .
These two examples show that the use of a chemical usually has both positive and negative impacts .
The balance between them can be compiled by a procedure of Hazard and Risk Assessment .
Factors Influencing Risk Assessment The determination of how objectionable a given risk is depends on a number of factors , many intimately related to human fear : Is the injury heritable ?
Is the presence of risk recognized by the subjects ( environmental vs occupational ) ?
Is the source natural or industrial ?
Is the risk larger than other familiar risks ?
Are there alternatives to the agent ?
Thimerosal prevents the conversion of dietary forms of vitamin B12 into the active form .
Whether thimerosal is acceptable depends on the availability of refrigeration for the conservation of vaccines , or on whether the cost of individual vials , as opposed to large multi-dose vials , is acceptable .
Manipulation of Risk Assessment Biases in Risk assessment can result from improper scientific techniques .
The investigative power of a study can be limited by using groups too small for the level of risk expected , insuring that the conclusions will have no statistical significance A study can be too short to see the full development of disease incidence .
The selection subjects or the exposure systems can be poor so as to include non-exposed among the exposed , or 2-22 incorporating large uncertainty margins in the exposure , weakening the potency of the study Alter routes of exposure that do not affect targets as strongly as they should Perform histology on samples not well preserved , so that effects of agents become undetectable The Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) quickly followed the precedent of the FDA and issued notice that CE was a candidate for denial of renewed registration on the basis of its possible carcinogenicity .
CE is readily absorbed by all routes of exposure , as would be predicted by its physical and chemical properties .
Its historical use as an anesthetic indicates its rapid rate and high percent of absorption via inhalation .
Measurements taken after oral administration of CE to rats indicate that at least 80 percent is absorbed from the GI tract .
It illustrates how various Safe Human Doses can be derived , according to different assumptions or data sources .
Emphasis was added to various parts of the text by your professor .
The elimination of CE in mammals is fairly rapid .
After inhalation of CE at 300 ppm for 8 hr , CE was undetectable in the expired air of rats in one study .
However , another study indicated approximately 80 percent would be eliminated via the lungs .
Thus , eight hours after administration some 95 percent of the CE absorbed should be eliminated .
CE has been used in consumer products such as glues , rug cleaners , as a propellant for aerosol products , and as an extraction solvent for decaffeinated coffee prior to the late 1970s .
Near that time , the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) prohibited its use as a direct or indirect food additive because of suspicions that CE was a carcinogen .
Much of the early toxicity research with CE was thought to support the idea that metabolism generated a reactive metabolite , probably the epoxide form , which was hepatotoxic and possibly capable of binding DNA and initiating cancer .
However , recent work has changed much of the current thought on CE metabolism by demonstrating that the alcohol metabolite is not dependent upon nor derived from the epoxide metabolite form .
This in turn suggests that species differences in hepatotoxicity and carcinogenicity are not related to species differences in the conversion rate of the epoxide to the less reactive alcohol metabolite .
In addition , it has been shown that covalent protein binding of CE intermediates does not correlate with the formation of the epoxide metabolite .
However , research has demonstrated that species differences do exist for covalent binding of reactive metabolites in rats and mice and that these differences in covalent binding parallel the different carcinogenic responses observed in these species .
Besides food sources , it was estimated that some 5000 medical , dental , and hospital personnel were exposed to CE and that about 60,000 additional persons were subjected to it annually when it was used as an anesthetic in medical situations .
Based on its widespread use and occurrence in our environment , it is not surprising that levels of 1-32 ppb were reported post-mortem in human tissues .
The FDA therefore also moved against any medical uses and banned all anesthetics containing CE .
Furthermore , CE was disallowed in cosmetic products , animal and pet foods , animal drug products , and as an oil-extraction solvent for seed products .
Interestingly , human microsomes form DNA adducts at a low rate similar to that found in the noncarcinogenic model , Osborne-Mendel rats .
Both rats and humans appear to have substantially lower rates of microsomally generated DNA-adduct formation when compared to the B6C3F1 mouse , a species that is positive for liver cancer after chronic CE exposure .
Researchers have also reported a species difference in microsomally generated covalent protein binding , which was likewise consistent with the results from the carcinogenicity tests .
A sex difference in covalent binding in the B6C3Fl mouse has 2-23 also been demonstrated which is consistent with the higher liver cancer incidence observed in male mice .
In this study the indices monitored for adverse effects were the number of implantations , litter size , incidence of resorptions , fetal sex ratios , fetal body measurements , and morphologic anomalies .
It was concluded that CE was not significantly maternally toxic , embryotoxic , fetotoxic , nor teratogenic in this study .
While this was a statistically significant difference , no change was observed at the 200 ppm exposure and the relevance of the 2000 ppm exposure in mice to expected human exposures , if any , is minimal .
Observations of rats versus mice show differences in metabolism , both quantitative and qualitative .
It has been found that the B6C3F1 mouse metabolized CE to a greater extent and generated even more macromolecular binding than expected when compared to the Osborne-Mendel rat .
Also noted in the mouse was a lack of DNA alkylation  , an increased hepatotoxicity , and an increase in DNA synthesis .
This led to the proposal that CE was probably not initiating liver cancer in the mice through alkylation of DNA , but was increasing tumor formation through a recurrent injury ( i.e. , a cytotoxic type of mechanism ) .
The importance of this proposed mechanism is that chronic , hepatotoxic doses would be required to induce cancer in any species .
CE has been reported as weakly positive or positive in only a few mutagenicity tests , but negative in a number of others .
The role that might have been played by contaminants in some of the positive tests has been suggested , but not proved .
Therefore , evidence of the mutagenic potential of CE is considered to be inconclusive and confounded by the presence of mutagenic contaminants in a number of studies using the technical grade compound .
Pure CE is apparently not mutagenic .
Acute and Chronic Toxicities of CE .
The acute and chronic toxicities of CE have been adequately summarized in a number of reviews and the data used here are drawn largely from them .
The National Cancer Institute published results of its bioassay in 1978 .
The results are in the table below .
In Osborne-Mendel rats exposed to doses of either 0.6 or 1.2 g/kg day , no liver cell tumors occurred and there was no statistically significant increase for any other type of tumor .
The rat data are complicated somewhat by the poor survival of all groups during the course of this particular bioassay .
the positive result in the B6C3FI mouse is somewhat undermined by the fact that about 0.3 percent of the CE consisted of the mutagenic contaminants common to technical grade preparations .
Subsequent studies in these strains of rodents yielded essentially the same results .
Like other chlorinated aliphatics , when administered at acutely toxic levels CE is principally a central nervous system depressant .
It also produces some liver and kidney damage , but at doses far higher than those at which carbon tetrachloride produces similar damage .
CE , like many chlorinated solvents , may sensitize the heart to epinephrine such that stress or excitement may produce cardiac arrhythmias .
An inhalation study performed by an independent laboratory reported that CE again produced positive results in the B6C3F1 mouse but was not carcinogenic in the Osborne-Mendel rat .
Dermal and oral administration of CE to ICR/Ha Swiss mice has also yielded negative results .
Thus , even when using technical grade CE with mutagenic contaminants present , CE was found to be positive in only one strain of mice .
Summary of the Toxicology of CE in Humans AF = absorption factor , the percentage of the dose absorbed via the designated route of exposure in the animal species divided by the percentage of the dose absorbed by humans via the designated expected route ; ER = exposure ratio , the dosage regimen ( i.e. , rate of exposure ) in the animal species divided by the anticipated exposure in humans ; t½ = a ratio of the elimination half-life in the animal species to the elimination halflife for humans ; SF = a safety factor included to dampen individual variability in responses to chemicals ; SF depends upon the reliability of the database used for the extrapolation .
A value of 10 , 100 , or 1000 is selected as shown below : The acute toxicity of CE in humans is remarkably similar to that observed in animals and will not be discussed here for the sake of brevity .
Again , both total mortality and cancer mortality were lower than expected based on rates established for the general population .
Out of these two studies some 1050 workers could be identified who had been exposed to CE for at least 15 years at an exposure level of about 50 ppm or greater .
10 = When the extrapolation is derived from a good database of human origin and there exists a substantial animal data base .
Extrapolation of the Animal and Human Data Both threshold and non-threshold models might be considered for the animal data .
Since a significant human database is available , risk estimates can be generated from these data as well , and then used in comparison with the animal extrapolations and as a guideline for final recommendations .
For non-cancer toxicity , or threshold situations , models for extrapolating to no risk are reasonably straightforward and basically are similar to the suggested no-adverseresponse level ( SNARL ) developed by the National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences or the no-observable-effect limit ( NOEL ) of the EPA .
The conversion must also take into consideration such factors influencing species response as absorption , metabolism , and excretion .
Finally , a safety or uncertainty factor is applied , which is derived from an evaluation of the extent , reliability , reproducibility , and interspecies variability of the available data from animal and , when available , human studies .
The BW factor is given a value of 1.0 rather than 70 because it is assumed that for an inhalation exposure at steady state the concentrations in critical tissues will be similar for all species and there will be no size adjustment needed .
The AF is assumed to be 0.70 even though this value is probably similar for all species and would therefore be 1.0 when making animal-to-man comparisons .
It is included as 0.70 in order to provide an additional margin of safety in this calculation .
The ER is 1.0 in as much as exposure situations are set to be the same in animals and humans .
The SF is set at 100 and is derived from a factor of 10 because good human data exist that suggest a ThD of 35 ppm does not lead to chronic illness in humans , but since chronic animal data were not utilized , and as the actual ratio for t1/2 can not be calculated because the human half-life is not known , a second factor of 10 is included to insure safety for a heterogeneous human population .
This can then be used as a threshold dose in a risk assessment formula for human exposure to CE .
An Estimated Permissible Concentration ( EPC ) can be calculated by using safe occupational air concentrations as a guideline .
Essentially , the EPC for air is calculated by converting the amount of CE a worker theoretically can be exposed to safely during a 40-hr week to the same total amount of CE but derived from a continuous daily air exposure ( i.e. , 40 hr/168 hr per week ) .
The EPC for water is then derived by applying the same conversion as was made for the ADI calculation in the preceding section .
Safe Human Dose Non-Threshold Model using Cancer Human Data Using the same extrapolation as before to convert safe air exposures to safe drinking-water exposures we get In the case of CE , the human data do not show an observable increase in the cancer rate .
Assuming this worst case when no cancer risk is detected in 1000 exposed individuals , the actual undetected risk could be as high as 4.5 x 10-3 .
There exist two epidemiologic studies based on occupational exposures for CE .
In both , the total mortality and cancer mortality were less than expected , so the risk observed can be considered to be zero .
2 1/day Note that the techniques used to extrapolate risk from the animal and human data produce very similar values .
Safe Human Dose Non-Threshold Model using Cancer Animal Data For the nonthreshold ( i.e. , cancer ) risk estimates , several different models can be chosen and each will derive a slightly different number .
The linear interpolation model proposed by Gaylor is selected here because it probably represents the most conservative approach and essentially derives the upper bound of the risk estimates that would be arrived at in other ways in other models .
It was assumed that the average exposure interval was only 15 years ; thus , this estimate will need to be converted to a lifetime of 70-yrs .
Rd e UCL where R = the conventional acceptable probability that cancer will occur ; de = the experimental dose chosen as reference in the animal studies ; UCL = the upper confidence limit cancer incidence observed at the reference ; SHD = the safe human dose .
2-26 The ADI is contained in 2 liters of water , which is the amount of liquid a person consumes each day .
addition , a ranking of CE using the system proposed by R. A. Squire indicates that CE would score approximately 31 points , which is equivalent to the score for saccharin .
This score suggests that CE is not a likely human carcinogen , especially at low doses .
Epidemiologic evidence , while perhaps not yet of sufficient strength to eliminate all concern for the carcinogenic potential of CE , indicates that even for the worst possible case it is a relatively weak human carcinogen .
Thus , there is much evidence to suggest the values in the preceding table are adequate for the protection of health in the circumstances of chronic ingestion of CE and would adequately protect human health from all adverse effects .
cancer data were also considered so as to calculate levels in the event that additional evidence better defining the carcinogenicity of CE is produced .
The values for the estimated safe water concentration , based on carcinogenic potential , are listed below .
Note that our hypothetical risk has been calculated from a substantial body of negative data by making worst-case assumptions that reflect the actual data .
A hypothetical risk has therefore been calculated to help set an exposure guideline even though no such risk has been identified in humans .
Gaylor 's model has been applied to the second table .
which is based on the assumption that CE is carcinogenic ; the animal data in that table were considered to give a worst-case estimate of the carcinogenic potential of CE .
That estimate was then tested for its relevance to the human situation by extrapolating to , and identifying for comparison , the exposures that would be predicted to produce measurable cancer rates in humans if the base estimates of risk were correct .
This test of the data is an upward linear extrapolation from the dose representing the 10-5 risk estimate .
This incidence is very high and would have been observed in the two actual epidemiologic studies that were made of workers with similar exposure levels and exposure intervals .
It can be concluded then that the risk estimates generated here from the animal data do overestimate the human risk .
A similar test of the extrapolation made from the human data in the two actual epidemiologic studies can not , of course , be done , but the true risk of CE exposure can be no worse than the estimate derived from the human data in which a cancer incidence was assumed for negative data .
Threshold derived from human data 10-6 Risk Safety factor of 1000 1.47 mg/l 1.43 mg/l The values are very similar ; the similarity stems from coincidental use of nearly equivalent inhalation levels obtained from animal experiments and time-established human occupational guidelines .
These rather high values for the CE content of water reflect the fact that CE is not a potent toxicant at acute exposures .
The few studies that reflect its noncancerous chronic toxicity likewise suggest that it is a relatively unremarkable toxicant at other than high concentrations .
As was seen earlier , while there is animal evidence demonstrating that CE increases the tumor incidence in the B6C3F1 mouse , these studies are mitigated by the fact that CE is not carcinogenic in the rat , or hamster , or in another strain of mice .
The positive studies are also confounded by the fact that contaminants in technical-grade CE are mutagenic and may have contributed significantly to the response observed in the susceptible mouse .
Studies comparing metabolic and biochemical differences between susceptible and nonsusceptible species for CE-induced oncogenicity suggest that the susceptible strain of mouse is not a relevant animal model for predicting human risks .
Summary of the Estimates of Risk Such a disparity between standards or recommendations for federal regulatory agencies is common today , because each agency assesses and manages risk by a different process .
It is recognized that risk management is a process in which environmental standards should reflect a variety of important considerations when they are established for contaminant levels in potential human exposure sources such as water .
Of primary importance is the protection of human health Once this criterion is satisfied a regulatory standard may reflect other societal concerns as well .
For example , while it could be argued that 1 mg/l might adequately protect human health from CE exposure , if subsequent human or animal studies removed concerns for its carcinogenic potential , the value chosen for a standard might be lower and reflect society 's desire for a chemical-free drinking water source .
For comparative purposes the EPA has established federal primary drinking water standards for a number of chlorinated organic solvents and chlorinated pesticides .
Since the 10-5-risk estimates calculated from the animal and human data for our example are reasonably conservative , and generally bracket this range , the state might argue to set the standard somewhere between 100 and 350 ppb .
Such a standard should reasonably and safely protect human health within the limits of the uncertainty that are inherent in the database and the models used to calculate the values from it .
It would also be in keeping with the intent of the EPA and the guidelines proposed by that agency for other chlorinated aliphatics .
Reiterating that much data are available to greatly lessen concern for the human cancer risk posed by CE , a state Division of Environmental Resources might reasonably select the cancer-risk estimate for a drinking-water standard as high as 350 ppb and at the same time choose to adopt the threshold-derived values in the 12-ppm range as a reasonably safe guideline to protect aquatic life and human health under short-term unexpected situations such as spills into rivers acting as drinkingwater supplies .
It is hoped that the reader will appreciate the fact that should the state finally pick either level as a standard , various interest groups could argue against one or the other of them by reasoning either that ( 1 ) risk of carcinogenic potential must be assumed until better and more definitive evidence proves there is none , or ( 2 ) since the animal and human data indicate no cancer risk , the higher value is safe because apparently-safe occupational exposures are far higher .
Arsenic Alters the Function of the Glucocorticoid Receptor as a Transcription Factor .
Acute thermal hyperalgesia elicited by low-dose morphine in normal mice is blocked by ultra-low-dose naltrexone , unmasking potent opioid analgesia .
Hormonal Chaos : the Scientific and Social Origins of the Environmental Endocrine Hypothesis .
Identification of phthalate esters in the serum of young Puerto Rican girls with premature breast development .
Induction of Calcium-Ion Efflux from Brain Tissue by Radiofrequency Radiation : Effects of Modulation Frequency and Field Strength .
These are clearly very different exposures .
This difference is caused because the EPA criteria are based upon the extrapolation of animal carcinogenicity data , and typically the EPA does not consider modifying factors such as mechanistic and species variations in the carcinogenic response ; nor does it use human data as a test or modifier of the animal extrapolation .
Thus , while the OSHA standard is designed to protect workers occupationally exposed for perhaps most of their lifetime , the EPA , by virtue of its risk assessment methodologies , advocates an exposure that is some 60-70,000 times lower .
Resulting Distributions for Lead and Dioxin .
The intravenous route allows complete and immediate penetration , whereas other routes allow delayed and incomplete absorption .
Different routes of exposure ( inhalation , cutaneous , ingestion ) may result in different amounts of toxicants circulating in the bloodstream , as well as various levels of toxicity .
General paths of toxicants through the body .
If one views the body as a multitude of membrane layers through which a toxic agent penetrates to reach a site of action , one can anticipate that the variables governing passive diffusion and active transport control the rate and extent of penetration .
Different routes of administration of drugs result in notably different blood levels over time , as seen in F3.2 .
In this graph , determining influences are the active excretion of penicillin by the organic acid system of the kidneys , and penicillin ’ s binding to albumin .
In some of the curves in the graph , the level in the blood is maintained by oil-phase , sub-cutaneous or enteric compartments .
The thickness of these barrier cells varies tremendously ( anticubital fossa vs heel ) .
Skin penetration is usually through passive diffusion .
Skin is vulnerable to organic solvents such as chloroform , methanol and dimethyl sulfoxide because of dissolution of skin lipids .
Concentration of Penicillin in the blood following various modes of administration .
As certain skin cells differentiate and become cornified , pre-keratin polypeptides are incorporated into intermediate filaments .
Eventually the nucleus and cytoplasmic organelles disappear , metabolism ceases and cells undergo apoptosis as they become fully keratinized .
The movement of the cilia in the lungs is coordinated .
The “ muco-ciliary escalator ” keeps alveolar tissues clean of particles and of many chemicals that absorb readily into the mucus .
If clearance of the mucus from the peri-alveolar region is impaired for some reason , the flow of air is impaired into and out of the lungs .
General anatomy of the respiratory system .
This explains the importance of micro-airway diameter in asthma attacks .
So , when working strenuously , transfer of toxicants by this route may be considerably enhanced .
There are about one billion alveoli in the lungs , equivalent to a 70 m2 effective surface , which allow the exchange of gases , primarily oxygen and carbon dioxide .
The spontaneous rate of respiration is controlled by 3-4 into the alveoli , as they are dissolved into the mucus while going down the bronchial tree .
Only particles less than 1 µm make it down into alveoli , larger particles being retained at higher levels in the respiratory tract .
The digestive surface is wet and functions well both in absorption and secretion .
Low pH from HCl secretion is observed in the stomach ( pH ~2 ) , where bacteria are killed and protein denatured to make them more sensitive to pepsin degradation .
Epithelial basement membrane of the lung .
The distance to be covered between alveolus and capillary is only about 0.5 µm .
A : White blood cell either from the blood or already in the surface of the alveolus will attempt to phagocytize the particle , and enzymatically digest it .
The pancreas has both an exocrine ( pancreatic enzymes for digestion ) and an endocrine ( insulin control over absorption of glucose into cells ) function .
Although the small intestine usually has few bacterial colonies , the colon is rich with them .
This explains why very small amounts of antibiotics can increase the growth rate of many farm animals ( and foster antibiotic resistance ) , as they make nutrients more available to the animal , as opposed to the bacteria .
Blood-soluble toxicants entering the lung will be transported along with oxygen to the heart through the pulmonary vein .
The heart then distributes the toxicant to all parts of the body .
Digestive System The process of digestion breaks up food mechanically and chemically into useable elements in great part by hydrolysis , which is why you need extra water after eating .
The inner geometry of the small intestine is such that the epithelium is at mechanical risk .
Most absorption of food and toxicants is in the small intestine .
But a toxin absorbed through the intestinal vein goes to the portal vein and directly into the liver .
Blood perfusion of various body regions .
Toxicants act locally , but are also carried by body fluids .
Very avascular tissues , like the lens of the eye , are less likely to be exposed to fluid-borne toxicants than other tissues .
This is because the toxicant is likely to be disposed of before reaching 3.2.2 .
First Pass Effect For any drug or toxicant reaching the blood , we should be concerned with what is known as the “ first pass effect ” .
Because 28 % of the blood circulates through the liver in dense capillary beds at low pressure and flow , and because the liver 3-6 has such good extractive capabilities , the agent may be metabolized as it passes through the liver for the first time ( F3.10 ) .
Approximately 70 % of the blood supply to the liver comes from the portal vein and 30 % via the hepatic artery .
In many cases , if the level of the agent in the blood ( acquired by ingestion , inhalation or dermal exposure ) is “ low ” , little or none will escape into the systemic blood ( vena cava ) on the other side of the liver .
At high levels of exposure and elevated concentrations in the bloodstream , some agent will escape entrapment in the liver and will be forwarded through the vena cava to the heart and the systemic circulation .
) , not all of the parathion is extracted by the liver , some escapes into the general circulation to be biotransformed in tissues .
Incoming arrows show circulation from the digestive system into the portal vein , while the vertical arrow at top shows exit to the vena cava .
It is thought that the systemic toxicity of parathion in poisoning cases arises from the extrahepatic biotransformation of the parathion not destroyed by the liver .
Penetration of Barriers Indiscriminate absorption of foodstuffs and toxicants into the body is prevented by tight junctions between cells .
The Blood-Brain barrier is an example of such an anatomical barrier that is particularly effective , making it difficult for physicians to obtain therapeutic doses of some medications in the Central Nervous System .
membrane recipe is a wall of peptidoglycans followed by galactans and arabinans and further by mycolic acids .
Most substances can not diffuse across this boundary .
The survival of the bacterium is enhanced by a slow division rate and detoxifying metabolism .
Phospholipid Bilayer For example , manganese , even if absorbed into the blood , is limited in its effects on the nervous system by the blood-brain barrier .
Unfortunately , particles can dissolve on the nasal olfactory mucous membrane , then proceed to nerve cells that lead to the olfactory bulb in the brain , where it is redistributed to do neurological damage… “ Pinocytosis ” is a mechanism of volume bolus absorption that is active in the gut , but is relatively rare .
Down the line , pinocytic particles are expected to meet peroxysomes for molecular digestion .
In spite of such marginal absorption mechanisms , however , most toxicants have to enter the body by going through cell membranes… F3.12 .
TRANSPORT MECHANISMS THROUGH THE BILAYER Proteins have a notoriously difficult time traversing the hydrophobic layers of the plasma membrane .
But Bacillus anthracis has a clever ways of pushing its proteins through .
Since most of the chemicals of concern are of rather small molecular weight , solubility is more important .
Penetrating substances are lipidsoluble enough to penetrate cell membranes , but not lipidsoluble enough to remain trapped there , such as is the case for the volatile organics that exert an effect on the CNS .
A is the cross section exposed to the compound , Cx are the concentrations on either side of the membrane , T is the thickness of the membrane and K is the diffusion constant .
The CNS has 2 active transport systems : one for organic acids , the other for organic bases .
The liver has 4 active transport systems : 2 for organic acids , one for organic bases and one for neutral compounds .
Protein binding to blood and tissue proteins can enhance or retard transport by passive diffusion .
or enzyme systems in which energy is expended .
Specificity ( sufficient or not ) and binding capacity limits are important , as these systems can be saturated .
According to the concentration of agent available , up to a certain maximum , the agent will be transported effectively .
Involves membrane proteins which encourage transfer .
They are both divalent cations and , in calcium deficient states , lead will be absorbed more efficiently .
The final `` resting place '' for lead is in the long bones where one finds much higher levels than are circulating in the bloodstream ( up-gradient transport ) .
Active transport for inorganic ions and for xenobiotics : this process needs ATP .
Most of the chemicals of concern to the toxicologist are relatively small molecules that enter the body and reach critical sites by passive diffusion .
These transport systems are not sufficiently selective to exclude other divalent cations of roughly the same size and charge ( see example , F7.4 ) .
Partition Coefficient Since membranes must be crossed , the solubility of a drug or toxicant from one medium into the next is a critical determinant of its migration into tissues .
The determination of migrating ability between two media can be specified between any two liquid or solid media , but frequently , reference media are used such as from water to chloroform , hexane or octanol ( see below ) .
Hydrophilic Lipophilic Molecules Acetamide Methanol Formic acid Diethyl ether p-Dichlorobenzene Hexamethylbenzene 2,2',4,4',5-Pentachlorobiphenyl [ in Octanol ] [ in Water ] In the example of F3.13 , one can see that as rats are exposed to breathing various Volatile Organic Compounds , the ones with the larger Partition Coefficient between Blood and Air tend to be draw out of the inspired air more rapidly and in greater amounts ( less isoprene than benzene than styrene in the blood ) .
As well , upon cessation of exposure , some substances tend to remain in the blood for longer periods .
However , the decay in a complete animal can also be influenced by fat stores , since the three compounds shown migrate to fatty tissues from the blood ( and vice-versa ) .
A low POW ( less than 3 ) can be used to convince regulatory authorities that an agent is unlikely to bioaccumulate or cause aquatic toxicity .
Dissociation Constant Since biological membranes tend to give passage preferentially to uncharged molecules , it is important to know the degree of ionization of molecules when dissolved in body fluids .
The degree of ionization can be calculated from Ka , the Dissociation Constant of the molecule , and the HendersonHasselbalch equation , shown below .
The partition coefficient ( POW ) of a substance between a lipophilic solvent , usually n-octanol , and water is commonly and conventionally used to quantify substance transfer not only between body compartments but also between compartments in the environment ( biota vs air , water or soil ) .
The Dissociation Constants ( Ka ) of various substances can be found from tables .
PLASMA pH 7.3 0.005 % non-ionized This implies that most aspirin molecules that get into the stomach wall ( plasma ) are unable to diffuse back into the stomach , while there is a continuous 5 % of aspirin molecules able to cross into the stomach wall from the stomach .
Aspirin concentration rises in the stomach wall as a result of that trap , and aspirin is steadily pumped by diffusion into the blood and absorbed effectively .
Since pH is so important to agent penetration , the body has many systems to control it .
You can live only for a little while with deviations in pH of about 0.5 units around 7.3 .
This 5 % of molecules of aspirin is able to cross into the hydrophobic membranes of the stomach wall , and ultimately into the circulation .
Aspirin stops an inflammatory cascade which converts arachidonic acid , a fatty acid of cell membranes , into prostaglandins , by inhibition of the enzyme cyclo-oxygenase .
At the cellular level , physical and chemical properties may prevent entrance of toxicants inside cells .
If toxicants do penetrate , they can be pumped out by efflux pumps or multi-drug resistance transporters , the same types of pumps responsible for drug resistance in bacteria : Multi-Drug Resistance associated P-glycoprotein ( MDR1 gene ) is weakly expressed in the liver , but more strongly in the intestines as well as T cells .
Total plasma volume in the average human adult is 3 liters , so any soluble toxicant injected into a vein would quickly be diluted into that volume .
Chewing with metal dental fillings releases mercury and activates these pumps , reducing the exposure of cells .
Some chemicals , such as synthetic musks , are capable of specifically disabling these cellular pumps , leaving the cells vulnerable to other exposures9 .
Once in the bloodstream , toxicants can be taken up by organs specialized to deal with them , or damage organs that are not .
Considerations of molecular size and lipid solubility are again of importance in gaining access from the blood into organs .
Some chemicals present in the blood find more affinity for specific tissues such as fat ( DDT ) and bone ( lead ) , and may concentrate there over time .
Distribution The two Circulatory Systems are by far the most powerful distributors of toxicants throughout the body .
Typical toxicant storage sites in the body .
It is driven mostly by muscle contraction , but also by a specialized system of valves throughout the system of lymph capillaries ( F3.9 ) , using only partly blood circulation as a propellant .
Where toxicants end up is of great importance in final determination of toxicity .
But controlling drug deposition in the body is difficult .
Red Blood Cells trapped in fibrin clot .
The delivery of toxicants to target organs is primarily from the blood , because of the speed of its transit .
These increased concentrations in turn reduced the 15 subjects ’ metabolic rates either through effects on mitochondria or on the thyroid gland 7 .
Since fat is so adept at absorbing a large category of liposoluble compounds , can it be viewed simply as a compartment designed to attenuate the exposures of the remaining body compartments to toxicants ?
Resulting Distributions for Lead and Dioxin As can be seen in T3.17 , body tissue distributions may vary substantially between toxicants .
Hair and nails have very high concentrations of lead , and are often used to document lead intoxication .
Some of these compounds have been shown to move up the food chain into the milk of Faroe Island women ( from whale blubber ) , just like PCBs8 .
Bone It has been estimated that 80 % of drugs taken by people emerge from the body intact .
But what happens to the remaining 20 % is interesting… The major function of the various biotransformation pathways in body tissues is to convert relatively lipid-soluble exogenous ( and endogenous ) agents into water-soluble , nontoxic and readily excreted compounds .
The strategy is : make toxicants water-soluble so they will not diffuse back across cell membranes , and will be more easily controllable for excretion .
Fat Body fat is a storage compartment that varies in size , depending on the individual .
In dieting , autointoxication can occur as toxic substances are released into the blood .
GENERAL MECHANISM OF BIO-DETOXIFICATION hydrophilic toxicants are generally eliminated from the body in their original chemical form , lipophilic toxicants must be biotransformed for elimination .
AGENT Many of the detoxifications reactions occur within the endoplasmic reticulum of individual cells .
Unfortunately , biotransformation can also result in bioactivation or toxication , which involves the production of a more powerful toxicant derivative from the original toxicant .
PHASE 1 Oxidation Reduction Hydrolysis The major organ for detoxification is the liver .
Detoxification is conventionally segmented into Phase I and Phase II reactions .
These reactions are also used by the body to eliminate normal by-products of metabolism .
For example , hemoglobin is metabolized to bilirubin , which goes through the biliary system into the feces .
Molecular weights smaller than 250 Dalton are excreted in urine , molecular weights larger than 350 Dalton are excreted in bile and feces .
When a single chemical agent is biotransformed , it is common that multiple forms of the agent result from the biotransformation process .
As these reactions are often dependant on enzyme kinetics , exposure concentration may influence the variety of molecular species produced .
These multiple forms of the original agent make toxicity more complex .
However , most of the differences in biotransformation are quantitative ( as opposed to qualitative ) , resulting from changes in the rates at which toxicants are converted to intermediates and to water soluble , readily excreted products .
Variations in Biotransformation The importance of bio-transformation in biological organisms is underlined by the fact that most proteins are actually  The molecular specificity of enzymes is determined by mechanical fitting ( shape ) , electrostatic and dipolar interactions , as well as electron and proton tunneling .
With Metabolic Rate Many of the sex differences in gene expression in the table above are hormone dependant : the differences are considerably attenuated if testes and ovaries are removed12 .
In this case , slower metabolism leads to increased effects because the AUC is larger .
Rodents metabolize drugs more rapidly than people do .
To reach the same blood level in a rodent model , administered doses are increased .
Although the blood levels are then comparable , gastrointestinal tract and liver levels become much higher in the rat , which increases tumors in the liver and digestive system .
In this case , faster metabolism leads to increased effects .
With Route of Administration The toxic reaction is also influenced by the route of administration , as this determines the order in which the toxicant will encounter various organs , and the toxicant flow .
With previous Exposures The biotransformation activity can be enhanced ( up-regulated ) by exposure to compounds such as phenobarbital , a technique used to harvest large quantities of the enzymes .
Not only will individual liver cells have more enzymes under phenobarbital induction , but the overall liver mass will increase with chronic exposure ( F3.20 ) .
This often corresponds to major response variations in animal experiments .
An example of a sex-based variation is the effect of the phytoestrogen diadzein in rats .
Injections increase growth hormone , testosterone and muscle mass in males , while the opposite happens in females10 .
With and Within Species used Rodents are frequently used as test animals , not because they are similar to humans , but because they are inexpensive , easy to house and breed , require minimal care and are easy to handle .
Phenobarbital induces liver weight gain and enzyme production , and inhibits apoptosis in the liver .
3-16 Commonly used test species share some of the metabolic capabilities of humans , but lack many others .
These metabolic variations occur not only between species and strains , but between different individuals of the same species .
But pre-exposure analysis of urine makes it possible to predict with 85 % accuracy the level of liver damage that will be produced by the drug in individual rats11 .
Some differences can be traced to minor genetic variations among individuals , called single-nucleotide polymorphisms , or SNPs .
Genome investigators at the National Institutes of Health ( US ) have already compiled more than 800,000 examples of such variations in humans .
Phase-I Biotransformation Clopidogrel inhibits blood clots and is prescribed after a heart attack to reduce subsequent coronary events .
Clopidogrel-treated patients who carry one or two ineffective variant alleles of CYP2C19 are 1.5 to 3.5 times more likely to die or experience cardiovascular-related complications than patients who carry highfunctioning alleles .
Genotyping would allow patients with these mutations to use alternate drugs13,14 .
These catabolic ( breakdown ) enzymatic reactions deal with the insertion , addition or exposure of reactive groups , initiating the conversion of the molecule : a polar group is either unmasked or added , to enhance water solubility .
The typical mechanisms used are oxidation , reduction and hydrolysis .
The reactions are carried out by enzymes in microsomes and in the endoplasmic reticulum .
Grapefruit juice elevates blood levels of many drugs primarily by inhibiting intestinal CYP3A4 during absorption .
Smokers who have two fully functional copies of the CYP2A6 gene smoke 7-10 more cigarettes per day than smokers who have only one .
The enzyme is inhibited by drinking 500 ml of grapefruit juice every day , a tactic to reduce the chances of cancer from smoking .
Xenobiotics activated to more toxic forms by individual CYtochrome P450 enzymes .
Growth hormone pulse profile is a major determinant of which P450 enzymes are expressed .
 Hormones are often most effective when released in pulses as opposed to continuous releases .
3-18 Another group of Phase I enzymes includes the hydrolases ( esterases , proteases , lipases ) , their function being to hydrolyze peptide and ester bonds of a wide variety of chemicals to expose polar carboxyl , and hydroxyl or amino groups .
There are many examples of xenobiotics activated by individual P450 enzymes to more toxic species , as shown in F3.23 .
PHASE II ENZYMES ( “ transferases ” ) Many drug companies now conduct lab tests to determine the influence of potential drugs on common metabolic pathways , such as cytochrome P450 enzymes .
If the drug affects them , it is pulled from further development , so that no interference with other drugs can occur .
Phase-II Biotransformation The introduction or exposure of reactive groups by Phase I prepares the way for Phase II .
Note that a molecule must be provided by the body to the toxicant to further enhance hydrophilicity in these conjugation reactions .
The conjugation converts the intermediates into water soluble products amenable to excretion via the urine and feces .
The transport proteins Multi-Drug Resistance Protein ( MRP ) and Pglycoprotein ( Pgp ) ship these adducts out of cells , and the body then eliminates the molecular complex through urine or bile .
Many chemicals already possess electrophilic groups ( as in cresol or phenol , which have hydroxy groups ) and do not need to undergo Phase I biotransformation , proceeding immediately to Phase II reactions .
In any study of a chemical 's excretion , it is advisable to know which excretory products are found at which dose , and have a method by which all can be quantitated .
The rodents are notorious for introducing a new pathway when a threshold dose is attained .
Certain pathways may occur at low levels of exposure while , at high levels , a second or even a third pathway may Humans may do the same , as is shown in F3.26 for the drug acetaminophen .
However , these pathways can saturate at high exposures , because of enzyme limitations .
The result is cellular damage with leakage through damaged membranes and , if severe enough , necrosis and cell death .
Phase I and II as Rate-Limiting In most tissues of the body , there are excess amounts of monooxygenases for the cells ' needs , but the various conjugating enzymes are limited .
A dramatic decrease in the activity of the enzymes occurs until the stores are replaced , a period of 18 to 48 hr in many species .
Repeated exposures result in repeated insults to the body's tissues and considerable damage if the reactive intermediates formed can not be conjugated .
The formation of certain conjugates is quite different between species .
For example , the human glucuronidates much of the acetaminophen ingested , with a small amount of sulfate formed unless the level of exposure is high , and then glutathione derivatives ( leading to mercapturic acids ) will be found .
The guinea pig does the same .
The conjugation of a simple molecule such as phenol is quite species-specific , as is shown in F3.28 , showing the pathways of phenol and the oxidative hydroxylation product , quinol .
With higher dosage , the cytochrome P-450 mono-oxygenases begin to react with the unconjugated drug , producing a quinoneimine derivative which can be utilized by the glutathione conjugating enzyme to form a mercapturic acid derivative .
At excessively high dosage , this pathway can be saturated and even halted .
3-21 While Phase I and II enzyme complexes are ubiquitously distributed through the body 's tissues , they are not uniformly distributed , but bear some relationship to the overall metabolic activity of the particular organ .
This concentration of enzyme activity is responsible for chemical-induced cellular damage in the liver .
The detoxification properties of Phase II enzymes can be manipulated , even by simple dietary changes .
Broccoli sprouts contain a substance , sulforaphane , which stimulates the production of Phase II enzymes , causing carcinogens to be more efficiently detoxified .
In the metabolism of ethanol , shown below , the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase has an affinity for ethanol 100 times greater than to ethylene glycol .
This allows ethanol to monopolize the enzyme , and for the renal excretion of unchanged ethylene glycol to occur slowly , avoiding its conversion to more toxic metabolites .
Toxicant Interactions Acetaldehyde Alcohol Dehydrogenase If more than one agent solicits the liver enzymes , interference or competition between two chemicals for biotransformation by the same or similar mono-oxygenases may result .
Unfortunately , there are too few good , well studied , examples of toxicant interactions in the literature .
Acetate Aldehyde Dehydrogenase You might have noticed a slight trembling the day after alcohol intake .
The enzymes monopolized for alcohol digestion would normally provide nervous system nutrients , but are not available in sufficient quantity to fill the needs of the nervous system .
Species variation in the metabolic conversion of Phenol in vivo .
Lungs Lungs can breathe OUT toxicants as well as they can breathe them IN .
Liver Feces can contain ingested toxicants which were not absorbed by the body at all , or toxicants that were secreted out either by the intestine or the bile ( DDT and lead ) .
Toxicants that are being expelled through bile can be reabsorbed into the body , possibly to produce more damage to the liver .
Techniques have been developed to interrupt the loop by ingesting an adsorbent such as carbon black , that will bind tightly and carry toxicants into the feces .
Bile secretions contain detergent-like acids for digestion of fats in the intestine .
Most of these acids are reabsorbed in the intestine .
Lithocholic acid is not reabsorbed , and is one of the most toxic natural substances in the body , acting as a mutagen that also inhibits DNA repair , which has led in animal models to colon cancer6 .
The incoming blood loses fluids through the glomerulus by mechanical filtration ( sieve ) and proceed to recuperate needed components at the proximal tubule , the loop of Henle , and the distal tubule .
The kidney is therefore an organ of RECUPERATION , 3-23 throwing out everything , and selectively reabsorbing precious components .
the gastro-intestinal tract content , for example by adding mineral oil to the diet .
Older people are know to be more sensitive to drugs .
For example , they have increased sensitivity to central nervous system depressants , to side effects such as high blood pressure from psychotropic medication , and are more likely to experience hemorrhage from anti-coagulants .
These changes correspond to alterations in the distribution and transport of drugs as a result of reduction in lean body mass ( vs fat ) , serum albumin in the plasma , and total body water , as well as reductions in the function of organs which assist in the metabolism ( enzymes ) and elimination of substances .
The strategy of making toxicants hydrophilic then becomes clearer .
At the glomerulus , hydrostatic pressure forces small molecules smaller than 60,000 Dalton out into Bowman ’ s capsule , thus conserving blood cells and large proteins .
20 % of all dissolved compounds less than protein size are initially lost in the kidney .
We would die rapidly without this constant recuperation .
Some active secretion into the urine occurs in the distal tubule , such that compounds that are actively secreted ( PAH , Diodrast ) can have a clearance greater than the glomerular filtration rate .
With this delicate anatomy , is it surprising that with a little hypertension , some protein or blood could leak into the urine ?
Species Variations Using benzene as an example , most animals appear to excrete low internal doses as metabolites in the urine .
For the low-dose treatments , a higher fraction of benzene is converted to hydroquinone and its conjugates in the mice compared to the rat .
The urine of the monkeys , on the other hand , contains approximately the same fraction of hydroquinone as found in the urine of mice .
One must keep in mind , however , that a smaller fraction of inhaled benzene is metabolized in the monkey compared to the mouse .
The urinary profile of the chimpanzee is similar to that of the rat in regard to the hydroquinone fraction .
The rate of elimination of many fat-soluble compounds can be enhanced by increasing the lipophilicity of F3.30 .
The effects of ethanol on the kinetics of toluene in man .
Mutual metabolic suppression between benzene and toluene in man .
Scientists Getting to the Core of Bacillus anthracis .
Thermogenesis and weight loss in obese individuals : A primary association with organochlorine pollution .
Nitromusk and polycyclic musk compounds as long-term inhibitors of cellular xenobiotic defense systems mediated by multidrug transporters .
Effects of diadzein on muscle growth and some endocrine hormone levels in rats .
Messina MJ et al ( eds ) , Second International Symposium on the Role of Soy in Preventing and Treating Chronic Diseases .
Tissue-specific expression and regulation of sexually dimorphic genes in mice .
Genetic Determinants of Response to Clopidogrel and Cardiovascular Events .
Effect of exposure concentration , exposure rate , and route of administration on metabolism of benzene by F344 rats and B6C3F1 mice .
Toxicokinetics in the Blood and Urine .
It arrived after the proliferation of cyanobacteria .
People did not invent pollution.it has been with us forever .
Extremely fast toxicodynamics is the development of drug resistance in bacteria .
Toxicological science is not explicitly concerned with the difference between Toxication and Intoxication .
Toxication is the instantaneous toxic action resulting from the action of a toxic agent at a given moment in time .
Whereas Intoxication refers to the effects of having been exposed to a toxic substance .
So , In an animal model with null toxicodynamics , the animal would not change as a result of intoxication .
In this ( unlikely ) case , it would be possible for a single animal to be exposed to successively higher doses of a toxicant , and the experiments would yield the same results as if many animals were exposed to a range of single doses .
In fact , the various manifestations of a toxicant could be uncovered by monotonously increasing the dose on a single animal .
Usually , time effects in Toxicology are dealt with using indirect concepts such as categories of acute , sub-chronic and chronic effects .
Further , the evolution over time of the agent ( primarily , agent concentration ) is separated from the evolution of the organism itself .
Toxicokinetics quantifies absorption , distribution and elimination of an agent in an organism .
It has the same basis as clinical pharmacokinetics2 , which monitors body burdens ( blood and tissue levels ) and therapeutic benefits .
The ideal Toxicokinetics for a drug ( achieving the ideal plasma concentration ) are not always easy to achieve .
In the last 10 years , many oncology drugs have been approved which are in fact only innovations in drug delivery : getting the proper amount of medication into the proper compartment for the proper time interval .
Toxicokinetics is a quantitative description of the tissue levels of toxicants as a function of time in body compartments .
It is concerned with peak blood levels , half-lives , body burdens and persistence of toxicants in organisms .
Note that toxicodynamics also happens at the level of species , through evolution .
Species change their design as a result of toxicant exposure .
2.5 billions years ago , there was no oxygen in Earth ’ s atmosphere , and there was little in the oceans until 1 billion Toxicokinetics is concerned with the duration and intensity of toxic action by taking into account : 4-2 the persistence of the toxicant and its metabolites in target organs , the accumulation of the agent in storage sites ( body burden ) , the rate of elimination of the toxicant .
Notion of Compartment The first step in toxicokinetics is to divide the human body into A compartment is a part of the body with a uniform toxicant concentration .
The simplest model assigns to a single peripheral compartment the organs that are more poorly vascularized .
The second step of toxicokinetics is to make assumptions about the rate of elimination of the toxicant from the central compartment , specifically zero order or first order elimination ( the models most commonly used ) .
The solid line represents blood levels based on intake and the pharmacokinetics of methyl-mercury .
Dots are actual observed blood concentrations .
Concentration of an agent in body compartments after injection into the blood ( central square ) .
Rapid equilibration between blood and Central compartment ( short arrows ) is already achieved before the beginning of the graph .
The curves show equilibration between Central and Peripheral compartments , as well as elimination from the Central compartment .
There are rate constants to and from the peripheral compartment but no escape route , indicating that what goes out to the peripheral compartment ( adipose tissue , bones ) must be released back into the bloodstream for transfer to the central compartment .
Toxicokinetics is of great clinical usefulness in predicting the evolution of symptoms Basis of Toxicity Testing , 1997 .
Almost anything can be a compartment , but the choice of modeled compartments depends on the properties of the toxicant .
Early studies used one or two `` abstract '' compartments ( even if they had no physical reality ) to describe the evolution of molecular concentrations over time .
An exposure generally results in the appearance of the agent in the bloodstream , but it usually does not remain there exclusively , as it is drawn out of the blood into other compartments .
In F4.2 , an agent injected into the blood is rapidly equalized in the central compartment made up of highly perfused tissues ( this process is too fast to be shown in the graph ) .
The blood level in the central compartment thereafter declines , indicating distribution into the peripheral compartment made up of the less vascularized tissues such as skin , muscle , adipose tissue and bone .
The concentration differences between tissue , plasma and organ are due to the partition coefficient between the regions .
Toxicokinetics based on blood analysis gives the investigator a way to predict future levels of the agent in the blood of the victim , but not in the target organs , unless the partition coefficient is known for all metabolites .
After the peak concentration in the central compartment , the central and plasma variables are essentially the same , except for the influence of the partition coefficient .
Before the red asterisk is the absorption and distribution phase , or  phase , and after the red asterisk is the elimination phase , or  phase .
The phase may last for a few minutes , or for days or longer , depending on the speed of exchange of toxicant between plasma-central compartments and tissues .
Of interest to pharmacologists is whether the central concentration of a drug reaches a high enough value for a long enough period so that it is efficant .
The data points on the right of curve of F4.3b correspond to pure elimination of the agent from the body .
Examples of slowly eliminated compounds are PCBs , DDT and lead .
When elimination of toxicants is very slow , elimination ( particularly of heavy metals ) can sometimes be improved by the administration of chelators : for example .
Metal Elimination and some aspects of biotransformation can readily be measured by sampling urine , feces , exhaled air and carrying out chemical analyses for the agent and its biotransformation products .
Storage can not be measured conveniently , requiring invasive and frequently unpleasant techniques to secure appropriate samples .
In the case of heavy metals or halogenated hydrocarbons such a polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCBs ) , the amount circulating in the bloodstream at any one time may represent only a small fraction of the body burden .
Mathematical forms of Elimination days ) is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract .
One of the sulfhydryls in DMSA binds to a cysteine molecule on albumin , leaving the other S-H to chelate metals .
DMSA produces the best urinary excretion of mercury , greatest in the first eight to 24 hours after ingestion , and is effective at removing mercury from the blood , liver , brain , spleen , lungs , large intestine , skeletal muscle and bone .
DMSA has removed two-thirds of the brain mercury deposits in animal studies .
The concentration of toxicant is proportional to the elimination rate .
The Mathematics of First-Order Elimination If the rate of elimination of a toxicant from the body is directly proportional to its concentration , this is expressed mathematically as the “ linear first-order homogenous differential equation ” shown below .
dt “ k ” determines the speed of elimination ( relative change in toxicant concentration per unit time and concentration ) , the minus sign in front of it signals a decrease in concentration with time .
Such paper can be generated through a printer by software ( Graph Paper Printer 4.21 for Windows , DVD Drive : \Graph Paper Program ) or by using the sheets supplied at the end of this text .
The formalism above should not obscure the fact that halflives can usually be found easily by simple curve inspection on a log-linear graph , or by simply inspecting the values of a table .
The time interval between these two concentrations is the half-life .
This simple method should be used to verify calculations .
For example the PCBs stored in our fat have elimination times that increase as the PCB concentrations decreases .
Even if our exposure stopped tomorrow , we would all still die with a measurable body burden of PCBs .
Clearance in ml/min is the volume of fluid that is totally cleared of the toxicant per minute .
If a chemical is not reabsorbed at all by the kidney , the clearance is equal to the glomerular filtration rate .
This is true of inulin and mannitol , used as test substances for glomerular filtration rate determinations .
If the substance is actively secreted , the clearance can be greater than the glomerular filtration rate .
A convenience of clearance is that it is additive between organs such as kidneys , liver , intestine , etc… Clearance is of critical importance in recognizing kidney diseases in the clinic .
F4.7 ( lower ) shows how two compounds administered in the same amount can have their clearance determined by continuous measurement of the plasma concentration of the substance .
Rate of elimination is a constant , independent of the amount of toxicant present in the body .
In the initial stages of high level intoxications , stored reserves of conjugation products are used very rapidly , thereafter leaving the elimination process to work only with conjugation products that must be synthesized de novo .
As concentrations diminish , conjugation products again become plentiful and diffusion , rather than conjugation product availability , becomes limiting .
Rate of elimination is proportional to the amount of toxicant present in the body .
An elimination process limited by bio-synthesis ( such as Phase II biotransformation ) , may be 0-order if the conjugation product is produced by the body at a fixed rate .
The liver has a limited ability to synthesize the needed molecules , and excretion can only proceed after conjugation .
The transition from zero-order to firstorder occurs at the Michaelis-Menten constant concentration ( KM ) , which is defined as the toxicant concentration at which the velocity of an enzyme reaction is half the maximal velocity .
However , if a process is limited by diffusion , one might expect first-order kinetics , since a higher concentration gradient of the agent will result in more toxicant transfer and in more toxicant being processed , assuming no other limits .
When the concentration of a chemical in the body is higher than KM , the rate of elimination is no longer proportional to concentration ( Zero-Order ) .
Elimination in the kidney is typical of such a process .
The more toxicant enters the glomerulus , the more will be carried away into the urine , assuming no further transport of the agent across membranes .
Therefore , a first order elimination often reflects a process of elimination governed by passive elimination by the kidneys .
Toxicodynamics : drifting Elimination with Dose A further complexity is introduced in the process of elimination by the fact that the elimination rate in the beta phase can change with the dose administered .
The same agent can display different half-lives at various doses , as shown below for the herbicide , 2,4,5-T. 2,4,5-T is a highly polar organic anion that does not undergo extensive storage , is not bio-transformed in the body , but is eliminated via the kidney by both glomerular filtration ( the major route ) and active secretion through the cells in the proximal tubule of the nephron .
The fact that at a given concentration in the blood , the half-life of the chemical can show different values ( slopes in F4.9 ) indicates that the elimination process is altered by the dose administered ( Toxicodynamics ) .
Therefore , the elimination performance of the organism was altered by the drug .
The “ biomonitoring ” is achieved by simply measuring the concentration of chloroform in the atmosphere of the cavity .
As the dose of chloroform increases in various separate experiments , we can see the transition from First-Order to Zero order elimination , reflecting a likely saturation of Phase II synthesis .
Multiple Compartments Many exposures are of the repeated ( hourly , daily , weekly ) or extended ( years ) variety , the level at any one time being insufficient to cause any overt toxicity .
Successive exposures add to the body burden , with adverse effects perhaps appearing in the future .
A one compartment model is typical of the case when blood and body organs reach equilibrium rapidly between them for toxicant concentration : a single compartment is therefore representative of the whole body , and excretion proceeds from this single compartment .
In many cases ( such a lead , or any lipophilic chemical ) , a single compartment is not enough , and one must resort to two or multiple compartments , with elimination proceeding ( in most implementations ) from a central compartment that is dynamically connected for toxicant exchange with other compartments , as shown in F4.11 .
Calcium illustrates the importance of compartments .
Living cells maintain an intracellular environment that is markedly different from the surroundings .
But few things are as poisonous as calcium : molecule for molecule , it is many times more poisonous than cyanide .
Both sodium and calcium are therefore vigorously pumped out of the cell .
To eliminate calcium , many cells render it insoluble by combining it with carbon dioxide to form extracellular calcium carbonate .
Horizontal arrows are individual rate constants between plasma and tissues .
Tissues in compartment 2 reach equilibrium with plasma at different rates , but these are sufficiently similar to be modeled by a single constant ( pair of larger horizontal arrows ) .
The surface of the tissues in this representation corresponds to the amount of drug contained in this tissue .
Vertical arrows show elimination from both compartments .
The black curve represents two administrations of the standard form of a drug , while the blue represents the slow-release form .
Complex models for Phenobarbital and Benzene toxicity .
Compartments that are diffusion-limited are separated in two , reflecting the fact that blood-borne movement of the toxicant is much faster than membrane crossing .
Repeated Exposure Depending on the time interval between exposures , the subject may have had sufficient time to eliminate the earlier dose , but in many cases , there is a cumulation of the doses , leading to a climbing body burden .
As the concentration approaches the critical limit in the target locations , signs and symptoms of intoxication will appear in subjects .
The signs and symptoms may reduce when people are protected from exposure , such as during the weekend .
Accumulation of body burden in the therapeutic administration of digoxin .
If one systematically exposed a subject to successive doses of an agent , retaining the assumptions that the -half-life remains unchanged , the rising plasma concentrations would allow the subject to excrete more and more of the drug , until his excretion balances his intake .
An exposure scenario familiar to physicians who want to obtain high therapeutic blood levels of an agent early is to give an initial large dose ( bolus ) followed by lower , maintenance dosage .
Repeated exposures lead to plateaus of toxicant concentrations which are influenced by altered  ½ .
If one determines body burdens of Cd , there is considerable variability until one reaches 35 years of age , at which time , if there is no additional F4.15 .
Factors influencing blood concentrations under repeated identical exposures to toxicants .
Assumes that the ½ does not alter with increasing concentration of agent in the body .
pharmacokinetic parameters in animal models such as the rat , the dog and even some in vitro models ( Caco-2 cell model ) invest a lot of money obtaining concentration vs time profiles .
An illustration of the influence of ½ in repeated exposures is shown in F4.16 , where the time needed to attain maximum concentration in the blood , as well as the plateau reached are altered .
It involves the oral or intravenous co-administration of multiple drug candidates into a single model and their separate analysis over time using gas chromatography and high performance liquid chromatography .
Data show pharmacodynamic profiles similar to those obtained for compounds in individual dosing .
Of course , compounds that can be converted to one another should not form part of a simultaneous pool .
Even though there are some risks associated with the N-in-1 method , they can be minimized by careful selection of the N-in-1 pool .
Toxicokinetics Examples In workplace hygiene , toxicokinetic calculations may occasionally adjust the exposure standard ( uniformly set for 8 hours ) if unusual work schedules are involved .
Calculation can be performed based on the number of hours worked each day , the number of hours worked each week , and the half-life of the agent .
Doping The elimination of drugs from the blood and urine is a central variable in the evaluation of doping .
In the table below , Drug Detection Times are expressed in terms of lower and upper boundaries .
Many factors determine an individual 's placement within these boundaries .
Drug Detection Times from Drug Test Success In the case of hexacarbon neuropathy , a certain body burden of nhexane is required to produce the characteristic central and peripheral distal axonopathy , and the neuronal damage is advanced before the diagnosis can be confirmed .
Removal of the individual from the exposure site frequently results not in a lessening of the signs and symptoms , but in a worsening of the condition , much to the horror of the attending physician , who now doubts the accuracy of his diagnosis .
What should be appreciated is that it is not n-hexane that is toxic , but a biotransformation product .
The body burden of the agent must be eliminated via this metabolic route , and so toxicity remains for about two weeks , during which the symptoms may remain stable or become more pronounced .
They only begin to subside later .
Depending upon the severity of the neurological damage , the patient may recover completely , make a partial recovery or remain permanently incapacitated .
From there , it is slowly released into the bloodstream and urine for up to several weeks .
Chronic users and individuals with high body fat count are at the greatest risk of long-term detection .
From there , it is slowly released into the bloodstream and urine for up to several weeks .
Chronic users and individuals with high body fat count are at the greatest risk of long-term detection .
Toxicokinetics in the Blood and Urine Toxicants or their metabolites can be sampled from body gases , body fluids or body tissues .
Toxicants in exhaled gases are often detectable only for relatively short periods after intoxication , as is the case for alcohol .
Therefore , one may need to be present on the spot for useful sampling .
Because of this , and because of the discomfort of obtaining most body tissues ( with the exception of nails and hair ) , sampling is often done using accessible body fluids , specifically urine and blood .
What classes of toxicants can we expect to find in either of them ?
Dioxins , PCBs and organochloride pesticides reside for months or years in the body , either because they are metabolized slowly or because they are hidden in lipophilic ( fatty ) compartments .
These properties tend to lower excretion rates .
Organophosphate pesticides , alcohol and volatile organic compounds , on the other hand , reside in the body only for hours or days , because they are metabolized quickly .
They may be favorite targets of enzymes , or enzymes may have good access to them because they are not hidden in lipophilic compartments .
This tends to heighten excretion rates .
Exposure to tobacco smoke is measured as blood ( serum ) cotinine in this histogram .
Therefore , persistent chemicals are often measured in blood , while transient ones are generally measured in urine .
Examples would include such anesthetics as halothane and isoflurane , where initial postsurgical recovery is rapid , but the patient may continue to exhale low levels of the agent for hours afterward .
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics for the clinician .
Breath concentration as an index of the health risk from benzene .
Lifespan extension in Caenorhabditis elegans by complete removal of food .
Blood Insects carry oxygen in their body using diffusion through internal air pipes .
However , there is a critical insect size above which diffusion is not effective enough .
In crabs and some fish , the blood contains a free solution of hemocyanin , which binds oxygen using copper .
It turns blue when oxygenated , and has only 25 % of the binding ability of mammalian hemoglobin , the molecule sequestered inside red blood cells for the purpose of binding oxygen .
5-2 There is only one vertebrate known to lack hemoglobin and red blood cells : the blackfin icefish , Chaenocephalus aceratus .
The extremely high oxygen content of the Southern Ocean allowed it to survive the loss of globin genes , and to rely on oxygen dissolved in the plasma , a loss of 90 % in oxygen-carrying capacity .
The fish has a much larger heart , blood vessels and volume of blood , and far denser capillary beds .
Mongooses , opossums and ground squirrels produce plasma protein ( protease inhibitors ) that neutralize the venom of snakes found in their habitat , showing an adaptive capability of this detoxification mechanism .
Types of Blood Cells The various cell types in the blood , erythrocytes , leucocytes or platelets , are differently affected by various toxicants because they are so different .
Leucocytes come in many forms , and the role of the various forms is not completely known .
T lymphocytes are involved in many cellular activities that define “ self ” within the body ( as In mammals , an extensive capillary network supplies tissues with oxygen and removes carbon dioxide throughout the body .
The difficulty of diffusion of oxygen and other nutrients through tissues limits the gap between adjacent capillaries to only 4 cell thicknesses .
Mammal-type circulation in an animal smaller than a shrew would be inefficient because of blood flow friction in the tiny capillaries .
Plasma Protein Exogenous agents such as oxygen , once into the bloodstream , may bind more or less loosely to plasma proteins ( F5.2 ) , which affect distribution to the blood ’ s cellular components and to perfused organs .
Plasma protein can have a substantial role in sequestering toxicants and in slowing their release to body tissues , thereby attenuating toxic shocks .
Venoms are animal poisons evolved from saliva , that are injected and distributed in the body by the victim ’ s circulation .
Hemotoxins from lizards attack blood vessel walls .
Stonustoxins from the stone fish and platypus create incredible pain .
Neurotoxins from the black mamba paralyze victims .
Myotoxins from rattle snakes or sea snakes attack muscle specifically .
Cardiotoxins from jellyfish attack the heart muscle .
Batrachotoxins used on arrow tips by some hunters induce total body system shutdown .
Blood contains one million different protein types , with abundances that span 12 orders of magnitude .
Monocytes are immune agents dispatched by the spleen and are the first responders to trouble sites .
For example , erythrocyte blood types define compatibility for transfusion , according to the presence of A , B and Rh antigens , but these characteristics have little to do with hemotoxicity .
Some hormones are homeostatic control systems that keep constant the concentration of hemoglobin .
Formation of Blood Cells The 5 to 6 liters of blood in the human body originate from undifferentiated mesenchymal cells or pluripotent stem cells found primarily in the bone marrow ( long bones , ribs , sternum ) and , in some species , in the spleen .
Stem cell proliferation is under the influence of specific cytokines ( poietins ) arising from different tissues in response to changes in physiological status .
Cytokines have a major role in stabilizing blood cell populations by stimulating the activity of cells , much like hormones do .
The difference between hormones and cytokines is circumstantial .
Hormones circulate in nanomolar ( 10-9M ) concentrations that usually vary by less than one order of magnitude .
But on the second child , problems start to appear because she has developed antibodies to the Rh factor , and the problems grow with each successive child .
In the newborn child , hemolysis can lead to anemia and even death .
Blood cells types arising from pluripotent stem cells .
5-4 The supply of red blood cells in mammals is controlled by the cytokine erythropoietin ( EPO ) .
Hypoxic conditions , anemia , or the presence of cobalt ions will result in the release of erythropoietin from the kidney to stimulate the production of more erythrocytes .
2 million new red blood cells per second are needed to maintain cell numbers in the adult .
Any reduction in the populations of needed cells will induce an attempt by humoral regulators to restore it .
There are a large number of such molecular regulators , which act on long production chains for various needed cell types .
Labs set the normal result range for a particular test so that 95 % of healthy patients fall within .
We briefly summarize below the meaning of common blood variables for human subjects .
Glucose : High values are associated with eating before the test , and diabetes .
Sometimes a glucose tolerance test , which involves giving a sugary drink followed by several blood glucose tests , is necessary to properly sort out normal from IFG from diabetes .
Until recently , it was assumed that many adult tissues had no stem cells and that if they had , the stem cells could only reproduce the tissue in which they resided .
However , more recent evidence suggests that stem cells from the bone marrow can form nerve , muscle and other types on non-blood cells .
Implicit in this blood system , and probably in other body systems , is asymmetrical division .
Stem cells given rise to two daughters , one of which replaces the mother , while the other differentiates into granddaughters .
Potassium is controlled very carefully by the kidneys , critical to the proper functioning of nerves and muscles , particularly the heart .
Any value outside the expected range , high or low , requires medical evaluation .
Sodium is regulated by the kidneys and adrenal glands .
There are numerous causes of high and low sodium levels , but the most common causes of low sodium are diuretic usage , diabetes drugs like chlorpropamide , and excessive water intake in patients with heart or liver disease .
Blood Tests Blood tests are extensively used in evaluating the health status of animals and humans .
If blood is not processed promptly and properly , high levels may occur .
If all values except LDH are within expected ranges , it is probably a processing error and does not require further evaluation .
High values may signal kidney disease .
BUN is also affected by high protein diets and strenuous exercise which raise levels , and by pregnancy , which lowers it .
Bilirubin is a pigment removed from the blood by the liver .
Low values are of no concern .
Creatine PhosphoKinase is an enzyme useful for diagnosis of heart and skeletal muscle diseases .
If CPK is high in the absence of heart muscle injury , this is a strong indication of skeletal muscle disease .
Uric Acid is normally excreted in urine .
High values are associated with gout , arthritis , kidney problems and the use of some diuretics .
AST , ALT , SGOT , SGPT , and GGT and Alkaline Phosphatase are enzymes that may be released into the blood following various forms of injury to muscles , liver and heart .
They may be elevated from liver problems , hepatitis , excess alcohol ingestion , muscle injury and recent heart attack .
GGT is also elevated in liver disease , particularly with obstruction of bile ducts .
Unlike alkaline phosphatase , it is not elevated with bone growth or damage .
Alkaline phosphatase is an enzyme found primarily in bone and liver .
Higher values are expected for growing children and pregnant women , or when damage to bones or liver has occurred , or with gallstones .
Low values are probably not significant .
Albumin and Globulin measure the amount and type of protein in your blood .
They are an index of overall health and nutrition .
LDH is an enzyme present in all cells in the body .
Anything which damages cells , including blood drawing itself , will raise 5-6 High LDL mark formation of deposits in the arteries .
High HDL is associated with low incidence of coronary heart disease .
VLDL is another carrier of fat in the blood .
T3 Resin Uptake or Thyroid Uptake is not a thyroid test , but measures the levels of proteins that carry thyroid hormone in the bloodstream and is used to compute the free thyroxine index .
Free T4 : This test directly measures the free T4 in the blood rather than estimating it like the FTI .
T3 is the more potent and shorter lived version of thyroid hormone .
Calcium in the blood is controlled by the parathyroid glands and the kidneys .
Calcium is found mostly in bone and is important for proper blood clotting , nerve , and cell activity .
An elevated calcium can be due to medications such as thiazide type diuretics , inherited disorders of calcium handling in the kidneys , or excess parathyroid gland activity or vitamin D. Low calcium can be due to insufficient parathyroid hormone or drugs like Fosamax or furosemide type diuretics .
Phosphorus is also largely stored in the bone .
It is regulated by the kidneys , and high levels may be due to kidney disease .
When low levels are seen with high calcium levels , it suggests parathyroid disease .
Thyroid Stimulating Hormone ( TSH ) : This protein hormone is secreted by the pituitary gland and regulates the thyroid gland .
Thyroxine ( T4 ) high levels may be due to hyperthyroidism , however technical artifact occurs when estrogen levels are higher from pregnancy , birth control pills or estrogen replacement therapy .
Natural Hematological Diseases The major natural diseases of the blood are red blood cell insufficiencies ( anemias ) and leukocyte proliferation ( leukemias ) .
Anemia Anemia results from insufficient delivery of oxygen to body tissues as a result of too few or defective red blood cells .
Chemical exposures can increase or decrease blood cell levels because the marrow-based process of generation of blood components is complex and delicate .
Problems with red blood cells are common even without intoxication : Microcytic Hypochromic : too small RBCs from iron deficiency or hemorrhage .
This problem can also be caused by lead exposure .
Red blood cell destruction or fragility can result from genetic diseases ( sickle cells ) , malaria or chemical exposure .
Appearance of blood in various diseases .
5-8 Chemicals can induce anemia , in part because red blood cells are exposed early to chemicals and have limited means of metabolic defense .
They produce ATP by anaerobic metabolism ( glycolysis ) because mitochondria would use up the oxygen that RBCs are intended to transport .
Damage to the erythrocytes may induce hemolysis .
Hemoglobin spilled into the plasma dissociates its four tightly bound sub-units and causes kidney toxicity by precipitating in the glomerulus .
There is damage to the glomerular membrane , hematuria and a gel-like precipitation in the tubular lumen , thus impairing renal function .
It also interacts toxically with a number of other molecules throughout the body .
Destruction of red blood cells also impairs oxygen and carbon dioxide transport .
The result is hypoxemia ( insufficient supply of oxygen to tissues ) and secondary toxicity in tissues which require large supplies of oxygen ( CNS , heart ) .
Sickle Cell Anemia Sickle cell anemia is a relatively common genetic condition , that amplifies problems related to oxygen insufficiency .
It is thought to result from an adaptation giving immunity against malaria .
The binding of CO to heme reduces the toxicity that occurs when heme is released into the blood , as erythrocytes desintegrate25 .
The sickle cell transition is due to the spontaneous crystallization of the variant HbS , triggered by low oxygen atmospheres .
It appears that specific molecules on the deformed cells make them stickier than healthy red blood cells , contributing to painful sickle crises .
Sickle cells are normally eliminated by the spleen .
The condition is most prevalent in black women .
Individuals that are homozygous for HbS are not usually in the workforce .
Individuals that are heterozygous show almost no impairment in most situations .
It may be appropriate to screen in special cases such as operation of aircraft and submarines .
Genetic trials in rats aimed at correcting sickle cell disease have been successful12 .
Oxygen Transport The erythrocyte has a simpler metabolism than normal cells .
In the disease called porphyria , mutated enzymes manufacture defective heme , which builds up to toxic levels .
The performance of Hb as an oxygen carrier is described by the oxygen saturation curve of blood .
The curve defines the volume of oxygen released under various partial pressures of gaseous oxygen ( F5.8 ) .
In order to prevent hypoxia in distal tissues , Hb loses its affinity for oxygen when the oxygen pressure is low .
Myoglobin in muscle has an even stronger affinity for oxygen than hemoglobin , making oxygen delivery to muscle tissues possible .
It has been demonstrated experimentally that there are alternative fluids to hemoglobin that can carry enough dissolved oxygen to sustain life ( F5.9 ) .
must be available from the blood .
Left , the complete molecule where the protein subunits are in red and blue , and the iron-containing heme groups in green .
The erythrocyte carries carbon dioxide away from tissues .
Without oxygen , animal metabolic pathways end up with excessive lactic acid .
Turtles can cope with large amounts of lactic acid because they neutralize it using the calcium carbonate in their shell .
Carps and goldfish can convert lactic acid to ethanol , which can be released from their gills15 .
Saturation of Hb with CO inhibits oxygen transport by binding less oxygen more tightly : in the graph , a depression of 90 mm Hg in oxygen pressure ( as opposed to 60 mm ) is necessary to release 5 ml of oxygen .
In a Toxicokinetic application , canaries have been used as warning devices to protect the health of miners , since coal mines are likely to contain pockets of CO. A canary is small , its metabolism is high , and it has a high breathing rate .
Therefore , it will be in equilibrium with CO much faster than a human , and should serve as a warning for humans to leave the tunnel .
Because of this , it is possible that the miner will die before the canary , usefully warning the canary to get out of the mine shaft .
Therefore canaries as a warning device are only effective above 0.2 % CO. Because the CO2 chemo-receptors that increase respiration rate are not affected by CO poisoning , the lack of O2 concentration into the tissues is not noticed until too late .
In the presence of CO , therefore , less Hb is available to carry oxygen .
5-11 oxygen should be the treatment of choice for seriously poisoned people to prevent memory lapses , confusion and language problems .
In the weeks following their poisoning by CO , some survivors develop concentration problems , personality changes or sensory impairments .
These effects can be traced to misguided immune responses to a brain protein , myelin basic protein , that is altered by CO gas14 .
CO binds mitochondrial enzymes and myoglobin , increases platelet stickiness and decreases arrhythmia thresholds .
Methylene Chloride is a solvent used in degreasing and paint stripping which is absorbed by respiration or through the skin , and is metabolized in the blood to CO .
Effects of Carbon Monoxide on Man and Canaries .
It also combats nausea , headache and loss of consciousness commonly experienced by victims .
Chemical Attacks on Hb METHYLENE BLUE Methylene blue is an artificial dye first used as a marker in studying bacteria and body tissues .
Methylene blue , which can be taken by mouth or injected intravenously , imparts a blue color to urine and feces .
It is also an antiseptic ( disinfectant ) , although its bactericidal properties are very mild , and a mild urinary antiseptic and stimulant to mucous surfaces .
It has been used as an antiseptic in urinary tract infections and as an indicator dye to detect certain compounds present in urine .
Methylene Blue has also been shown to minimize the occurrence of kidney stones , and may prevent their formation .
Methylene Blue activates a normally dormant reductase enzyme system which reduces the Methylene Blue to leucomethylene blue , which in turn is able to reduce methemoglobin to hemoglobin .
It is believed to be reduced in the tissues to the leuco form , which is slowly excreted mainly in the urine , together with some unchanged drug .
The erythrocyte has limited ability to detoxify activated oxygen which , if present in excess , becomes toxic to the cell .
Hemoglobin can be pathologically oxidized to MetHemoglobin .
MetHb is greenish brown to black in color and does not bind oxygen or CO ; it binds water instead .
Hb in erythrocytes can be reduced back to the ferrous state by two metabolic routes ( F5.12 ) : a spontaneous system of detoxification based on reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide ( NADH ) generated by the glycolytic Embden-Meyerhof pathway .
Cytochrome b5 and cytochrome b5 reductase are the enzymes responsible for changing MetHb back to Hb by maintaining NADH supply .
Methylene blue can be used to reactivate Hb in emergencies .
These chemicals can produce hypoxia in the exposed .
Both systems are dependent on glycolysis .
Detoxification of MetHb is also stimulated by addition of methylene blue ( left ) , which is a classic antidote for nitrite and cyanide poisoning .
The vast majority of work-related hemolytic anemias are induced by exposure to benzene derivatives or aromatic ring structures .
These agents are potential oxidation-reduction catalysts , acting as oxygen scavengers , water soluble enough to be carried in an aqueous medium but lipid soluble enough to penetrate the erythrocytic membrane , gaining access to a vast storehouse of oxygen .
In the ensuing reaction , both the chemical and the oxygen become free radicals .
Structures of chemicals causing hemolysis or methemoglobinemia .
Hb can also be irreversibly denatured or oxidized by chemical agents .
In this case , Heinz bodies are observed that are covalently bound to the inside of the Red Blood Cell membrane ( F5.14 ) .
These cells are not toxic by themselves , but will usually hemolyze because of loss of flexibility , which can lead to anemia .
The Genetics of Erythrocytic Hemolysis Chemical-induced hemolysis began in the 1800 's German dye industry when coal tars were converted into basic industrial chemicals , including anilines , nitrobenzenes , quinones and naphthalene .
Hemolytic anemias can be caused by such metals as lead , mercury , copper , as well as arsenic ( as arsine ) , all of these cytolytic metals are highly reactive with sulphydryl groups ( -SH ) that are abundant in erythrocytes in the form of glutathione , hemoglobin , etc .
In most individuals , the mechanisms of detoxification described previously are sufficient to deal with any MetHb and oxygen radical formation .
These subjects are particularly sensitive to red cell hemolysis induced by chemicals , because glutathione can not be regenerated .
Treatment with reducing agents like ascorbic acid ( Vitamin C ) or Methylene Blue considerably lowers the amount of MetHb in their blood .
In most cases this passes unnoticed , because the organism is able to compensate .
Most patients live a perfectly normal life without appreciable effects of this disorder .
When it becomes noticeable , it is usually the result of an oxidizing factor from the environment : a drug , an infection , some food or chemical exposure .
2 ) Antimalarial drugs related to 8-amino-quinoline such as pamaquine and primaquine , used in WW II in the Pacific theatre , resulted in massive hemolytic crises among black soldiers .
It was recognized that there was a susceptible subgroup within this population .
3 ) The analgesics acetanilide and acetophenetidin have been removed from the over-the-counter market because of patient hemotoxicity , particularly with abuse .
Among his regular duties was the refilling each morning of a barrel containing industrial grade aniline .
The barrel , in which aniline was stored under pressure , was located on the floor of a room shared by three employees .
Aniline from this sealed barrel was pumped as needed via tubing into the dye-application work area by means of hydraulic pressure .
Beginning about two years prior to the accident , the man complained to his wife of a gradually worsening , unremitting headache .
For two months she in turn had noted bluish discoloration of her husband 's lips , ears , and fingertips , most evident on his return home from work each evening .
One midsummer morning , just after the patient had filled the reservoir barrel with a fresh supply of aniline under sealed pressure , the bottom of the barrel blew out .
Roughly 30 gallons of aniline gushed forth , flowing over the patient 's clothing and inundating the floor of the work area .
He , as well as the two co-workers standing nearby , rapidly experienced nausea , dizziness , and faintness , but after cleaning up the spilled chemical all resumed their work until noon .
Two hours later the patient returned to work but grew dizzy , nauseated , and began to vomit .
( The two co-workers had called in to report themselves too ill to return to the factory . ) .
There was no anemia , but the reticulocyte count was 5.8 percent and , after supravital staining , 6.8 percent of his red cells displayed Heinz bodies .
Within less than 24 hours the hematocrit dropped moderately , the reticulocyte level rose ( and continued to rise for several days ) , and the portion of red cells containing Heinz bodies increased to nearly 30 percent .
The methemoglobin concentration fell abruptly during the initial 15 hours and by the second day only traces remained .
However , 15 percent of the hemoglobin at that time was in the denatured form of sulfhemoglobin .
Nevertheless , the patient felt much improved and complained no longer of dizziness or nausea .
Urine specimens on admission and during the several days thereafter contained high concentrations of the oxidant hydroxyl derivative of aniline , p-aminophenol .
In the ensuing week the patient gradually recovered completely from his symptoms , and the only laboratory aberrations that persisted beyond ten days were elevated levels of reticulocytes and of cells containing Heinz bodies ; traces of sulfhemoglobin were detectable for several weeks .
All three abnormalities cleared entirely within two months of the accident .
Glutathione is a radical scavenger that works rapidly ( with or without the enzyme glutathione-s-transferase , a Phase II conjugating enzyme ) to neutralize highly reactive intermediates capable of damaging and weakening the erythrocytic membrane .
The inability to maintain adequate levels of GSH destabilizes the cellular protective mechanism , resulting in weakened and easily ruptured erythrocytic membrane and enhancing hemolysis .
The syndrome leads , upon exposure , to methemoglobinuria , formation of sulfhemoglobin ( only partially soluble in erythrocytes ) which precipitates into spheroidal bodies ( Heinz or inclusion bodies ) , alteration of the shape , rigidity , and viability of the red cell , causing hemolysis and resulting in massive hematuria .
It is important to point out that Heinz body hemolytic anemia can occur in normal ( not enzyme-deficient ) individuals , but only if exposure to a chemical oxidant is several fold higher than that producing hemolysis in the G-6-PD deficient person .
In HCN poisoning , blood delivery of oxygen is normal , but HCN impedes the use of oxygen by cells .
Exposed subjects have a red color , similar to CO poisoning , since their venous blood returns still loaded with unused oxygen .
This is done by administration of inhaled amyl nitrite and by injections of sodium nitrite .
The production of MetHb allows drawing CN away from cytochromes because ferric heme groups avidly bind ionic cyanide , forming cyanmethemoglobin .
This is followed by the administration of thiosulfate .
Most resuscitations from cyanide poisoning occur in individuals who ingested soluble salts , where absorption is delayed .
This characteristic might be used to attenuate ischemic damage during emergency situations .
H2S is naturally produced in the body , and manages many important biological functions , in particular blood pressure21 Few poisons are more rapidly acting than inhaled hydrogen sulfide , which is common to sewers and oil fields .
The treatment is similar to that of CN poisoning , but there are rarely trained individuals available , and prepared with an intravenous nitrite injection .
Chemicals causing Hemolysis Many chemicals can attack the blood , resulting in obvious changes in blood cellular composition .
In most cases , the exact mechanism of toxicity is unknown .
Toxicity to stem cells , which largely control the ultimate composition of the downstream differentiated cells , needs to be defined in a special way , different from toxicity to differentiated ( somatic ) cells , particularly in their relation to oxygen .
Differential blood counts can document imbalances of blood composition resulting from exposure to toxicants .
White Blood Cell Imbalances Exposure to some chemicals ( benzene ) can induce leukemia .
Thrombocytopenia Low platelet counts produced by certain chemicals may result in blood loss .
There are other mechanism for blood loss .
For example , warfarin inhibits fibrin formation from fibrinogen , while aspirin inhibits platelet aggregation .
With sufficient heme being manufactured , ALA-S does not function , whereas with the blocked ferrochelatase , there is no heme formed and ALA-S continues to make aminolevulinic acid , which is used by other enzymes to make porphyrin intermediates .
Levels of these intermediates build up in the body , urinary excretion of ALA is elevated ( one diagnostic test ) as is excretion of a number of the protoporphyrins ( both fecal and urinary excretion are diagnostic ) .
The symptoms and signs of intoxication are shown in F5.18 .
Hematologic changes in the anemia of lead poisoning in adults .
Hematotoxicity among Chinese Workers heavily exposed to Benzene .
Effects of Exposure to Benzene Concentration in PPM Effects 10,000 Death after a few hours 4,000 Narcosis Risk of very severe pancytopenias 200-400 Abnormal blood values in 50-80 % of cases Considerable risk of leukemia 125-200 Severe pancytopenias Milder forms of pancytopenias & other cytopenias 65-125 Acute , headache & fatigue after a few hours 40-65 Hemocytopenia Blood cells affected 25-40 Reduced blood Hemoglobin 10-20 Critical level for leukemia risk 1-10 Chromosome Damage Odor Threshold & OSHA Exposure 1 limit If you have been intoxicated with lead , what can you do ?
EDTA can be used to chelate lead out of the body .
With introduction of restrictive measures on the use of benzene , the incidence of AML declined within three years to zero ( F5.23 ) .
Overview of the Immune system The primary function of the immune system in mammals and lower species is protection from microbial pathogens ( bacteria , virus , fungi and yeasts ) and tumors .
Lymphocytes play an essential role in immune responses .
B lymphocytes first develop in the fetal liver , and later in the bone marrow .
B lymphocytes recognize self antigens , whereas T lymphocytes recognize antigenic peptides associated with major histocompatibility complex molecules , which includes both self and nonself antigens .
The main types of APCs are Langerhans cells , dendritic cells and macrophages .
Occupational levels have been high in the past , but government regulations have forced their reduction to a TWA of 1 ppm .
In a study , Infante and White demonstrated that less than one week of exposure at 10 ppm resulted in chromosomal damage to bone marrow cells , significant depression of bone marrow and disturbances of immune function4 .
It was felt that these observations were highly significant , given the fact that most leukemias and related disorders seem to involve stem cell abnormalities and immuno-deficiencies .
ImmunoToxicology Immunotoxicology is concerned with the detrimental effects of foreign substances ( xenobiotics ) on host immunity , either as a consequence of the activity of a substance or its metabolites on the immune system or as an inappropriate immunological response to that substance .
It includes immune responses to xenobiotics that result in allergy and other forms of immune injury .
Immune Bioactivation of Xenobiotics Xenobiotics can modulate the function of the immune system at several levels and can have two opposite consequences : immunosuppression or immune overstimulation .
Immunosuppression can result in a diminished resistance against infection , while immunostimulation can result in hypersensitivity reactions , allergies , and autoimmune disease .
Immuno-Suppression A number of xenobiotics can suppress the maturation and development of immune cells and cause immunosuppression .
For example , benzene is myelotoxic , because its reactive metabolites can severely damage progenitor cells in the bone marrow , leading to a pancytopenia .
This general hematopoietic cell destruction also includes the lymphocyte precursor cells ( T and B cells ) , so most specific immune system cells will be compromised .
Immuno suppression can also be caused by other mechanisms occurring in other parts of the immune system .
Clinical ecologists believe MCS is a form of immune dysfunction caused by the insidious accumulation of exogenous chemical exposures over a lifetime .
Another biologically oriented hypothesis is that MCS represents an atypical biological consequence of chemical injury , or injury to the respiratory tract after an acute inhalational episode .
A more recent concept has focused on the relationship between the mucosa of the upper respiratory tract and the limbic ( nervous ) system .
In contrast to xenobiotics such as TCDD , which suppress the function of the immune system , other xenobiotics can enhance the function of the immune system .
Such an immunostimulatory effect can get out of control , and result in harmful reactions .
These forms of reactions are rare , but they are toxicologically relevant because the degree of the adverse effects can be severe .
Hyersensitivity Reactions and Allergies Two basic forms of such xenobiotic-induced immunostimulation are toxicologically relevant in humans .
The first type comprises allergic reactions , which are most commonly known as chemically induced respiratory tract allergies or contact allergies in the skin .
In allergic reactions , the immune response is directed against toxicant-modified antigens , involving antibodies and T cells directed against toxicant and antigen .
CardioToxicity Toxicity of chemicals on the heart must include effects not only on the musculature of the heart ( F5.25 ) but on the nervous tissue that controls the ventricular muscle ( Purkinje system ) , the vasculature of the heart , and the peripheral blood vessels throughout the body .
Autoimmune Reactions Multiple chemical sensitivity ( MCS ) is an adverse reaction to low levels of many common chemicals .
Symptoms may occur after toxicant exposure , by 5-23 and exposures in the workplace may either antagonize the effects or potentiate them , further confounding the issues .
Many of the arrythmogenics listed below are also anesthetics .
Many chemical agents found in industrial settings exert a direct effect on the peripheral blood vessels ( constriction or vasodilatation ) , with subsequent changes in blood pressure causing hypertension or hypotension ( severe headaches , dizziness or fainting ) .
Many workers may be on medication 5-24 of CO , for example , peripheral vascular effects occur prior to any serious action on the heart 2 .
Industrial scenes are related to incomplete combustion of fuels : furnaces , boilers , automobiles , with hazards increased in cold weather , because of closed doors and windows .
Arrhythmias may result from chronic exposure to ethanol , sometimes resulting in ventricular fibrillation and sudden death .
METALS Cd , Pb , Co , Mn , Ba produce negative inotropic and dromotropic effects as well as structural damage to the heart .
Aldehydes at higher concentrations may stimulate the release of catecholamines , with a sympathomimetic acceleration of the heart rate ( positive chronotropic effect ) .
It is believed that the cardiodepressant ( acute ) effects of alcohols and aldehydes are due to an inhibition of intra-cellular calcium transport .
However , aldehydes might stop the formation of advanced glycation end products , which would explain the positive effect on cardiovascular health related to wine consumption16 .
The enzymes pump sodium out of depolarized cells ( nerve cells as well as cardiac muscle cells ) in order to achieve repolarization .
Such agents have a negative chronotropic effect and a negative dromotropic effect , the heart beating more slowly .
The negative inotropism increases with up to 4 chlorines and chlorinated alkenes ( trichloroethylene ) are more potent than trichloroethanol .
Dysrhythmias result and , if the ECG is done at an appropriate time , one can see skipped beats , irregularly spaced beats , extra beats , all out of phase with the regular electrical activity .
The irregularities may be spasmodic ( periodic ) , necessitating the monitoring of patients for a length of time before the effects are seen .
Being lipophilic , these pollutants settle into fats and oil .
David Carpenter of the University of Albany and his colleagues discovered a dose-dependent climb in risk of both systolic and diastolic hypertension with rising blood concentrations of PCBs .
Heavy Metals Lead , cadmium and cobalt have selective cardiotoxic properties , producing negative inotropic and dromotropic effects , as well as structural ( degenerative ) changes in cardiac muscle .
The cardiomyopathy seen in drinkers of illicit '' moonshine '' during prohibition was attributed to lead .
The metal originated in the homemade condensing coils soldered with lead , or use of old automobile radiators .
A study in women 65 and older indicates that higher blood lead increases the risk of premature death .
A bizarre cardiomyopathy affecting habitual beer drinkers in Quebec City was related to the presence of a chemical additive containing cobalt sulphate .
The chance of having unhealthy systolic blood pressure — that maximum pressure , which occurs as the heart muscle contracts — was tripled in the middle PCB-contamination group and almost quadrupled in the highest PCB group.26 bradycardia-hypertension .
Fatalities have occurred in workers exposed to organic nitrates after strenuous exercise , 1 to 2 days following cessation of exposure .
There is a loss of vascular tone with pooling and trapping of blood in the veins of the lower extremities .
Considerable amounts of methemoglobin are formed with chronic exposure .
Organic Nitrates The treatment of anginal pain with amyl nitrite is well known .
By both routes , the heart and coronary vessels receive a relatively high dose of agent which causes localized vasodilatation of the coronary vessels and an improvement of local circulation with a relief of the ischemia .
There are a number of nitrated compounds , particularly in the explosives industry , that cause the same effects .
The measurement of blood pressure showed marked decreases in systolic/diastolic ratios before and after work , from lowered systolic pressure .
When handling the gellike mixture , the workers wore surgical rubber gloves , but never changed the gloves , using them day after day , and not discarding them .
With a fresh pair of surgical gloves at the beginning of the shift , no change in blood pressure was seen later in the day .
Even more impressive was the fact that regularly replaced cotton ( washable ) gloves protected the workers .
The concentration of nitrated compounds were building up over time in the gloves .
The compound was being With restrictions on prescription amyl nitrite , butyl and isobutyl nitrite have been used as room deodorizers in spray applicators , but also as drugs of abuse for enhancing sexual pleasure .
Butyl nitrite has a greater hypotensive effect than lower analogues but not as great as the isobutyl derivative .
The toxic effects of nitrite inhalation are shown in Table 5.28 , most of them from the peripheral vasodilatation .
Other studies noted bradycardia ( vagal nerve stimulation ) and heart block at higher doses .
There are a large number of different nitrated compounds used in present-day military and civilian explosives .
Miners , reentering an area in which blasting has taken place , frequently experience severe headaches unless they wait for the ventilation system to clear the area of volatiles .
Notice the musculature around the artery .
The Smooth Muscle Cells in the arterial wall can be injured after the endothelium has been damaged by a toxicant .
A toxicant may also penetrate through the endothelium to create a mutation in the smooth muscle cells , followed by proliferation .
Both mechanisms trigger chronic inflammation and narrowing of the artery .
Heavy Metals Exposure to environmental chemicals can also disable vascular control .
Phenanthraquinone , on oily component of diesel soot , inhibits vessel dilatation in older rat muscle , but not in younger ones22 .
Dust Particles Some degree of arterial obstructions are found even in young men .
Animal and human studies show that dust particles less than 2.5 µm in air pollution irritate the lungs and provoke inflammation of the blood vessels .
The more pollution there is around your home , the thicker the walls of your carotid artery becomes13 .
Such particles , irrespective of their chemical makeup , are able to suppress secretion of endogenous vasodilators , such as nitric oxide .
Breathing 0.15 µg/m3 of exhaust particles , typical of heavily polluted cities , is capable of immediately rising diastolic blood pressure by 6 mm of Hg .
National Geographic , Feb.2007 It appears that mitochondrial damage foreshadows the onset of atherosclerosis .
Agents Toxic to Blood Vessels There are four large classes of agents capable of intoxicating blood vessels : gases , heavy metals , dust particles and others .
Correction of sickle-cell disease in transgenic mouse models by gene therapy .
Ambient Air Pollution and Atherosclerosis in Los Angeles .
Maintained cardiac pumping in anoxic crucian carp .
Meeting of the American Chemical Society .
Long-term Air Pollution Exposure and Acceleration of Atherosclerosis and Vascular Inflammation in an Animal Model .
Acute Blood Pressure Responses in Healthy Adults During Controlled Air Pollution Exposures .
Hydrogen sulfide increases thermotolerance and lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans .
Effect of Calcium Supplementation on Blood Lead Levels in Pregnancy : A Randomized Control Trial .
He develops rash on his legs and quits because of health concerns .
Two other workers testify of health problems which led them to quit the same job .
Once sensitized to TDI , individuals can react to concentrations below the odor threshold .
Sickle hemoglobin confers tolerance to Plasmodium infection .
Blood pressure and hypertension in relation to levels of serum polychlorinated biphenyls in residents of Anniston , Alabama .
The ensuing hypoxia causes vaso-constriction* , pulmonary artery hypertension and finally right heart failure .
*Vascular reaction in the lung is contrary to reaction in other parts of the body .
If vessels are isolated from the lung , they no longer show this reaction ( an unknown substance is released by lung tissue ) .
Hormones that stimulate the growth of blood cells .
Malignancies due to occupational exposure to benzene .
Projections of leukemia risk associated with occupational exposure to benzene .
A report of two cases from mineral assay laboratories and a review of the literature .
Case Study : Carbamate and Propanil Pesticide case and Chloracne .
But only a few spiders are of lethal consequence to humans , because they possess fangs large enough to penetrate human skin .
The stratum corneum of dead keratinized cells is the principal barrier layer , composed of high lipid but low water content .
The normal role of this layer is to retain water and heat ( against dehydration and hypothermia ) , and to prevent the entrance of microorganisms and most toxic substances .
The epidermis is a compacted layer of epithelial cells with tight junctions in the stratum granulosum .
The dermis , underlying the epidermis , is composed of diverse types of cells including hair follicles , sebaceous glands , eccrine ( sweat ) glands with a dense capillary bed and good blood flow .
Heat control is managed by perspiration release , cooling of the surface and heat exchange through the capillary bed .
Dermatologists claim that female skin is more susceptible to dermatitis , although there is no specific measurement to document this .
It seems also that women are more often sensitive to allergens as opposed to irritants .
Skin Anatomy There are tens of thousands of types of spiders , and practically all of them are venemous , because they require venom to kill 6-2 6.2.3 .
More recent studies , examining the dermal absorption of toluene , ethylbenzene and styrene in aqueous solutions , representative of drinking water contamination , revealed that the dermal absorption of these contaminants has been consistently underestimated5 .
Skin penetration of chemicals in aqueous solution tends to decrease exponentially with molecular weight , and to increase with POW as well as with their water solubility .
Alcohol in the blood is known to increase toxic compound absorption through the skin .
The barrier is imperfect , and substances can penetrate under unfavorable conditions .
The epidermis is replaced about once a month , the stratum corneum about once every two weeks .
Therefore , should penetration be exceedingly slow , the toxicant will eventually be shed .
In the occupational setting , workers ' hands always have cuts , nicks , and scratches and , in any dermal irritancy test , both intact and abraded skin are tested , since the effects might be quite different .
This is what is recommended on many pesticide container labels , in addition to wearing an apron or coveralls while mixing and loading .
These experiments can be extrapolated to industrial chemicals such as benzene , PCBs , and nitroaniline , the results demonstrating a significant acquisition of agent in the epidermis ( surface bound to stratum corneum ) and dermis , as well as absorbed systemically6 .
Rubber solvent , in which traces ( 0.35 % ) of benzene occurred , did not enhance the absorption of benzene on single exposure , but did upon repeated exposure or upon application to the palm of the hand8 .
This receptor is known for binding environmental toxicants , but it also regulates the balance of protein and anti-inflammatory responses of the immune system .
Exposures to environmental toxicants such as dioxin may encourage the development of autoimmune diseases .
In the case of many petrochemical exposures , the enzyme AHH transforms chemicals landed on the skin into other compounds of stronger carcinogenic activity .
When exposed to coal tar , these people do not develop higher rates of skin cancer .
Skin Metabolism The skin has metabolic functions like any other organ , among which : Skin tissue is rich in immune cells .
Vaccines could be injected into the skin using about 20 % of the dose used in intramuscular injection , and still obtain the same protection .
A tight network of cells covering the entire body is formed in the skin by Langerhans cells .
These cells ingest antigens present in the skin and transport them to lymph nodes , activating the immune system to protect the body against pathogens .
Skin Irritants in Industry Water eliminates natural oils and swells live epidermal cells .
Cleaners solubilize-disorganize barrier lipids and natural moisturizing factors in the stratum corneum , denaturate protein , intoxicate membranes .
Mechanism of Dermatitis The effect usually occurs locally on the skin surface , from the degreasing , dehydrating , protein denaturation and osmotic pressure change induced by the toxic agent .
The resulting inflammation destroys the stratum corneum , allowing invasion by bacteria and a localized immune response .
The condition may be difficult to treat , and persist for some time .
Once through the barrier , the toxicant may penetrate deeper into the subcutaneous layer and exert an effect on the pilosebaceous follicles , resulting in acneiform eruptions , aggravated by hot humid working conditions and exposure to grease and heavy oils .
Plant products , animal protein penetrate the skin through follicular shunts .
There is a fair degree of individual variation among subjects .
In industry , the activities most likely to be associated with skin diseases are mixing , blending and grinding , painting coating and printing , dyeing , plastic processing , rubber compounding , mining , metal fabrication and woodworking .
Chronic eczematous contact dermatitis caused by leather components in a hatband .
With successive exposures to an allergen , an individual develops red spots often similar to eczema ( with or without edema ) which appear more rapidly and remain longer in later repeats .
Low molecular weight inorganics can cause allergic sensitization ( ex : nickel , chromium in jewelry ) , but organics such as perfumes can also cause allergy .
It may , in extreme cases , result in total permanent disability , in part because ordinary protective measures often prove ineffective in view of the small amounts of agent necessary to trigger reactions .
Cosmetics include aromatherapy products , but exclude products used solely as medicines .
The regulation forbids cosmetic products that may cause damage to human health when applied under normal conditions of use , or reasonably foreseeable conditions of use .
Animal Testing Forbids testing a finished cosmetic , any of its ingredients or combination of ingredients , on an animal in order that the product may comply with Regulations and the manufacturer must not have tested or commissioned tests on animals of the finished product or its prototype or any of their ingredients .
The cosmetic product must also not contain any ingredients that have been tested on animals by others for the purpose of developing new cosmetic products .
If minimum durability is more than 30 months , it must be marked with the period after opening for which the product can be used without harming the consumer .
Information available from the 'responsible person' A responsible person is required to keep certain product information at the registered office address or the address detailed on the product .
The product information must include the composition of the product .
For perfume or perfume compositions in the product , you are only required to keep the name , code number and supplier identity .
Qualitative information for all composites , and the quantitative information in relation to dangerous substances , must also be made easily available to the general public , the physico-chemical and microbiological specifications of the raw materials and the finished product , and the purity and microbiological control criteria of the cosmetic product , the method of manufacture , which shall be in accordance with good manufacturing practice , an assessment of safety for human health of the finished product , including the criteria as stipulated in the Regulations .
There are additional criteria where the product is intended for use on children under three years old or exclusively for use in external intimate hygiene , the name and address of the person or persons , with the minimum qualifications as detailed in the Regulations , who carried out the assessments , existing data on the undesirable effects on human health resulting from use of the product .
This information must also be made easily available to the general public , evidence to justify any claims made by the product , data on any animal testing performed by the manufacturer , his agents or suppliers , relating to the development or safety evaluation of the product or its ingredients , there is a procedure detailed in the Regulations that , subject to agreement , allows the confidentiality of some ingredients to be maintained .
In digestive allergy , it is known that a larger time to breakdown in the gut for a protein means that it is more likely to be an allergen .
The term “ atopy ” designates an increased genetic susceptibility to the development of occupational dermatitis due to immune cell hyperreactivity .
Multiple chemical sensitivity is an adverse reaction to low levels of many common chemicals .
Symptoms may occur after toxicant exposure by inhalation or contact .
Clinical ecologists believe MCS is a form of immune dysfunction caused by the insidious accumulation of exogenous chemicals over a lifetime .
Another biologically oriented hypothesis is that MCS represents an atypical biological consequence of chemical injury , or injury to the respiratory tract after an acute inhalational episode .
A more recent concept has focused on the relationship between the mucosa of the upper respiratory tract F6.9 .
Whatever the case , it seems likely that cures for these hypersensitivity reactions will be related to reducing by apoptosis the populations of rogue Tcells .
They bind to the AHH receptor , which is also involved , beyond skin metabolism , in a number of developmental pathways .
Various vitamin-A derivatives such as tretinoin and retinoic acid have been useful in treating chloracne .
The 1 and 2 Euro coins have been found to release large amounts of nickel in part because they contain two alloys , which create an electrochemical potential .
The corrosion is apparent when coins are immersed in artificial sweat ( right ) .
The prevalence of natural rubber latex allergy has been estimated to be 5–18 % in health care workers , and latex exposure has been one of the leading causes of occupational asthma in the last several years .
Skin Carcinogens Chloracne is a more severe and specific form of acne which could be labeled environmental halogen acne .
6-9 Chromium Skin Lesions Workers performing chrome plating with exposure to hexavalent chromium from time to time will develop chrome ulcers on their skin ( usually hands ) .
Healing may take weeks to months .
Barriers Creams are relatively ineffective against dermatitis , perhaps except for the case of oil-based barrier creams against a wet environment .
“ Within the chrome plating industry in the West Midlands ( Great Britain ) some platers treat their chrome ulcers with a substance known locally as 'Black Jack ' which is an icthamol paste applied as an anti-inflammatory agent to the open wound. ” Icthamol is rich in ferrous iron , which would also reduce chromium ( VI ) to Chromium ( III ) .
The intact skin is not a barrier to sunlight , particularly to the UVB radiation , the type that causes sunburn .
Petroleum products can be activated by skin enzymes or sunlight .
Exposure to UVB when young seems very important in determining the incidence of the various forms of skin cancer later in life .
This is why occupational compensation would be limited for such a disease .
It can develop from a mole or on unblemished skin , grows quickly and can metastasize .
From the lower layer of the epidermis , it develops slowly , rarely metastasizes and is nearly 100 % curable if treated .
Squamous-cell carcinoma : from the cells in the upper layer of the epidermis , caused by UV rays , it is usually curable if treated early .
Grows faster than basal cell carcinoma and can metastasize .
People with some history of artificial light tanning are 1.5 times more likely to have basal-cell carcinoma and 2.5 times more likely to have squamous-cell carcinoma .
Although such cancers are not often lethal , having them correlates with other types of cancers .
Although sunlight is the most frequent cause of skin pigmentation , coal tar and other petrochemical substances may increase pigmentation , while paratertiary Scientific American .
Uneven pigmentation can also occur from heat or microwave exposures .
Phototoxicity In phototoxicity , a chemical is converted into dermally toxic compounds by sunlight in the skin .
A phototoxic or photoallergic reaction can be produced with either a dermally acquired chemical or one taken systemically , such as a drug .
They caused acute dermatitis following ingestion and exposure to sunlight .
Such phototoxicity is independent of immune or allergic mechanisms and can occur in anyone if enough light energy and the concentration of drug in the skin is high enough .
6-12 There are a variety of well known drugs that are photoallergens , and more and more industrial chemicals are showing similar properties .
Photoallergy Photoallergy is an acquired , altered reactivity to UV irradiation that is dependent on an antigen-antibody or cellmediated hypersensitivity response .
While relatively uncommon , such reactions are similar to an exaggerated sunburn response and may be immediate ( solar urticaria with transient wheal and flare reactions ) or delayed ( papular and eczematous ) .
Eventually , as the individual becomes sensitized to the agent , spots will appear at other , often covered , sites on the body where contact with the agent has not occurred .
Such conditions have all the appearance of a developing immunity , with time and frequency of exposure being the relevant factors .
Photo contact dermatitis often involves areas exposed to the sun .
Irrigation of the eyes is the universal method of treatment for all serious eye exposures .
Although the lens includes structural proteins for neutralization of toxins such as glutathione-S-transferase , and heat-shock proteins , it is still very vulnerable .
If an agent is irritative dermally , there is no need to test it in the eye , since eye membranes are more susceptible than the skin ’ s .
There is no need to test strong acids and bases , as well as most moderate irritants in the eye .
To provide appropriate safety messages on the labels and MSDSs , there is a testing requirement for chemicals .
There appears to be less interspecies variability with strong irritants or with non-irritants ; the differences occur mostly with moderate irritants .
This test was not satisfactory for all agents ; for some , the rabbit eye was not as sensitive as the human eye .
Anatomy of the lower half of the eyeball .
Dermal Irritancy The basic test has changed little in the past 58 years , although smaller volumes ( 0.1 ml > 0.01 ml ) of chemical are now used to reduce adverse effects , while still allowing assessment of potential toxicity .
Various techniques to measure changes in corneal thickness have been tested , specifically a slit lamp perpendicular to the corneal apex .
In view of the frequency of accidental splashes and spills , it is important to have MSDS data on the irritating or corrosive effects of a chemical on the skin .
Most suitable animals possess a good fur coat which can be shaved , leaving only a fine stubble .
There are strains of mice and guinea pigs that are hairless or `` nude '' : sad looking , wrinkled things that generate sympathy .
There is no agreement on which skin is morphologically closest to the human skin .
However , dermal irritation studies are usually conducted in a specific animal species for simple practical reasons , selection usually having little to do with any similarity to the human skin .
# I. CORNEA : A. Opacity , degree of density Scattered or diffuse areas of opacity , but details of iris clearly visible Easily discernible translucent areas , details of the iris slightly obscured Opalescent areas .
CONJUNCTIVA : B. Chemosis ( lids and nictitating membranes ) Any swelling above normal ( includes the nictitating membranes ) Obvious swelling with partial eversion of lids Swelling with lids half closed Swelling with lids more than half closed III .
It comes down to how red is red and to what degree is swelling seen .
A numbering system or grading score has been developed for the two parameters which is dependent upon the skill of the investigator or technician to `` grade '' the severity of the biological response ( See T6.21 ) .
Having scored each animal for erythema and edema , obtained average scores for each parameter and incorporated them together , one is left with interpreting them for the products .
Based on these ratings , numbers generated in the test can be converted into label warnings and safety information in the MSDS ( T6.22 ) .
Larger animals such as swine , minipigs , and dogs may also be used .
For a wide range of chemicals , the skin of the rhesus monkey is considered to best mimic the 6-15 both being reactive and sensitive .
pain , and use too many animals because of the variability in response .
Substitute Ocular Tests Many promising alternative ocular tests , some of which are being accepted by regulatory agencies , have been developed , including isolated cornea , enucleated eyes , cultures of corneal and lens cells as well as non-animal preparations11 .
This still leaves the problem of a suitable species from which to obtain the eyes for the ex vivo tests .
The results of a comparative study sponsored by the Commission of European Communities revealed that the enucleated chicken eye appeared to be the most practicable when compared with the eyes of swine and cattle and tested with a number of well known chemicals15 .
Since large numbers of chicken eyes can be obtained at little cost from slaughterhouses , this test would appear to satisfy animal rights groups and still give a valid assessment of ocular toxicity .
Comparing the ex vivo and in vivo tests has demonstrated that materials capable of causing ocular injury caused an intensification of the stromal image and swelling of the cornea with a good correlation between in vivo ocular damage and ex vivo results14 .
Since animal lenses can be cultured over days or weeks with their optics and repair mechanisms intact , even chronic changes as well as recovery can be documented .
Variables used to gauge toxicity can be as simple as changes in the focal length of the lens , as shown below for three common corneal anesthetics .
NIOSH interpretation of skin testing ratings .
McCreesh and Steinberg , 1983 Rating Intact Abraded Skin Skin 0-0.9 1-1.9 2-4.0 0-0.9 1-1.9 2-4.0 Interpretation Nonirritant : probably safe for intact human skin contact Mild irritant : may be safe for use but appropriate protective measures are recommended Too irritant for human skin contact : avoid contact Nontoxic to cellular components of abraded skin : probably safe for human skin contact Mild cellular toxins : may be safe for abraded skin contact Cellular toxicant too irritant for abraded skin contact : avoidance of contact is advised 6.10.3 .
Irritection-Corrositex vs Draize The descriptions of T6.20 and T6.21 have attracted the attention of animal rights activists , who have campaigned to eliminate such studies on the basis that they inflict needless 6-16 6.10.3.2 .
The reagent solution contains proteins , glycoproteins , lipids and low molecular weight components that self-associate to form insoluble matrices .
The toxic changes are measured over 5 hours using turbidity readings .
Most of the new in vitro tests offer considerable simplicity , economy and speed .
Some things are lost from the animal models .
Certainly the new tests are simpler to interpret .
But simplicity of interpretation goes in hand with paucity of output information .
The usefulness of the tests depends on how carefully they are designed and researched .
The development of synthetic skin tests has also been intensive .
“ Corrositex ” is an in vitro test that determines chemical corrosivity and allows assignment to packing group specifications .
It replaces the rabbit skin test .
Effect of focal length of bovine lens from three eye anesthetics .
After a potentially corrosive chemical is placed on the membrane , the chemical detection system may become colored .
When cultivated at the air-liquid interface in chemically defined medium , the transformed human corneal epithelial cells of the cell line HCE form a corneal epithelial tissue ( mucosa ) , devoid of stratum corneum , resembling ultrastructurally ( tissue morphology and thickness ) the corneal mucosa of the human eye .
“ Irritection ” is a quantitative in vitro test that ranks ocular and dermal irritation potential of cosmetics , consumer products , pharmaceuticals and raw industrial chemicals .
Clinical Patch Tests People may need to be tested for their reaction to chemicals .
Reactions are graded one hour after the tape is removed .
When there is greater reaction at the edge of the patch , this usually denotes irritation rather than allergy .
Depigmentation can sometimes result from exposure to test chemicals .
The large number of chemicals that can be used in various versions of the clinical patch tests speaks to the variety of possible cutaneous reactions .
Chemicals used in diagnostic patch testing .
Unless noted , chemicals are in petrolatum in the first two columns .
Chemicals present in more than one column are in bold .
Finn chambers for allergic sensitivity tests in patients .
Workers also moved freely from one area into another , and many had been exposed to both compounds .
It is not very toxic , but it does cause the skin disease chloracne , which can be quite persistent and disfiguring .
This compound is chloracnegic because of a peculiar chemical configuration .
in which two chlorine atoms on one aromatic ring are connected either by another ring or by a double bond to two chlorines on another ring , reminiscent of TCDD ( dioxin ) , 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin , which is extremely toxic It has only recently been established that the chloroazobenzenes also cause chloracne .
In a few documented cases patients have had active chloracne for up to 20 years after they were exposed to one of these chemicals .
In many instances chloracne gradually improves over a number of years following cessation of exposure .
Until we made our investigation it had not been known that propanil caused chloracne .
Our findings were substantiated by measuring chlorinated azobenzene in the propanil and by testing the chloracnegic effect of this material on the rabbit ear .
Case Study : Carbamate and Propanil Pesticide case and Chloracne ( modified from Williams & Burson ) A plant in Arkansas manufactured several types of pesticides in rotation , manufacturing and packaging one pesticide for several weeks or months , and then doing the same with another pesticide , and then perhaps a third .
The CDC became involved at this plant because there had been several hospitalizations of workers and also a number of complaints .
OSHA inspected the plant and requested that a health hazard evaluation be done .
Two physicians from the CDC then surveyed the plant .
On investigation , they found that two types of compounds were produced .
Measurement of occupational exposure to pesticides .
Regional variation in percutaneous penetration in man .
A study of the skin absorption of ethylbenzene in man .
The role of skin absorption as a route of exposure for volatile organic compounds ( VOCs ) in drinking water .
Skin absorption of chemical contaminants from drinking water while bathing or swimming .
Methods for the study of irritation and toxicity of substances applied topically to the skin and mucous membranes .
Guidelines for safety evaluation of cosmetic ingredients in the EC countries .
The in vitro assessment of severe eye irritants .
The in vitro assessment of eye irritancy using isolated eyes .
Justification of the enucleated eye test with eyes of slaughterhouse animals as an alternative to the Draize test with rabbits .
Benzene dermal penetration in rhesus monkeys .
These skin problems were more of a problem than the toxic effects of the methomyl .
In trying to evaluate the problems , we divided the workers into different groups .
The molecular determinants of sunburn cell formation .
Relative toxicity of three corneal anesthetics measured in vitro with the cultured bovine lens .
Incidence of Basal Cell and Squamous Cell Carcinomas in a Population Younger Than 40 Years .
19 7-1 stimulate the cells to regrow , making it possible for severed limbs to be surgically reattached to the body , and regain function .
In the brain and spinal cord , white matter corresponds to the thick protective myelinating sheaths around nerves and nerve bundles .
The gray matter is made of cell bodies and nonmyelinated or lightly myelinated fibers .
In higher vertebrates , the proportion of white to gray matter increases as one ascends the phylogenetic tree until , in man , more than 40 % of the cross-sectional area through the brain consists of glistening myelin .
The dark circles are nerves wrapped with myelin , the smaller light ones are unmyelinated nerves .
Anatomy The nervous system includes the brain , spinal cord , and the peripheral sensory and motor nerves .
The central nervous system is the brain and spinal cord only .
Nerve cells normally grow when they are young , and stop when they are mature .
Injured central nervous system cells are mostly unable to regenerate on their own ( they do so to a very limited degree ; there are very few absolutes in biology ) .
Types of cells in the central nervous system .
There are various cell types in the brain , and the neurons have been the star , primarily because of their spectacular action potentials ( F7.3 ) .
Specialized glial cells called astrocytes influence connections between neurons , the level of chemical messengers in the synapse , as well as the blood flow within the brain .
They collect nutrients from the bloodstream , and purify them for neurons , protecting the brain from some toxic agents .
When this protection fails , for example for solvents which can easily gain access to brain tissues , a variety of effects occur , some of which are reversible ( for example , alcohol intoxication ) .
Blood-Brain Barrier The endothelial cells of the vessels in the central nervous system are held together by tight junctions between cells , preventing access of unwanted substances .
The cells of the barrier also have larger numbers of mitochondria and low pinocytotic activity .
The barrier is successful in preventing the following toxicants from entering : lead compounds , penicillin and staphylococcus toxin .
The blood-brain barrier , like the Great Wall in China , is not continuous , but has gaps in the hypothalamus and the choroid plexa .
In fetuses and very young animals , the barrier is under construction .
In humans and in many animals , a long childhood implies an adaptable neural structure that must be programmed through experience primarily in childhood , but even later in life .
The processes needed for proper programming of such a complex structure probably increase the vulnerability of the brain to toxicants ( lead is a good example ) .
Contrary to the lungs , the particles are not easily cleared from the CNS13 .
Anatomically , there is a cell body with dendrites , making close contact with the terminal portions of adjacent neurons .
Communication between one neuron and another ( across a synaptic cleft of gap ) is chemical in nature , requiring specific neurotransmitters released from the terminal to a receptor .
All of this , under normal conditions takes no more than 10 milliseconds , but if the ability to repolarize is impaired ( as with the insecticides DDT and pyrethrins ) , one sees a slow repolarization with a prolonged negative after potential ( F7.3C ) , a state in which the nerve is only partially repolarized and is highly susceptible to rapid depolarization again .
Agonists substitute for naturally occurring neurotransmitter substances and produce a response .
Attachment of the neurotransmitter to a sensitive `` patch '' ( receptor ) on the cell body of the next neuron results in depolarization of the cell membrane and the propagation of an electrical impulse down the axon of the neuron .
The channel lets in one sodium for each 1000 potassium ions , stripped of its hydrating molecules .
Myelin If you hit your finger with a hammer ( you may try this at home ) , you may notice that the feeling of pain will “ reach you ” later than the hit detection .
This is because these two signals are not propagated by the same neuron size .
The depolarization-repolarization is relatively slow in nonmyelinated nerves , each small segment of neuronal membrane having to undergo the event as the pulse propagates down the F7.3 .
To increase this velocity , a size increase proportional to the square root of the diameter of the neuron is required .
So , if the rate of conduction is to be doubled , the nerve must be four times larger in diameter .
This would lead to very large nerves when high speeds are needed .
Anoxia in the frontal lobe causes impaired memory and reasoning .
Plasma leakage in the corpus callosum creates internal pressure .
Coma and death result from further stress on the brain stem .
The conduction velocity in myelinated nerves increases roughly in proportion to the diameter of the nerve e.g .
Myelin reduces space requirements and makes nerves function faster .
Rather than each small segment of the neuron undergoing depolarization-repolarization , this occurs only at the small junctions ( nodes of Ranvier ) between the myelin segments .
Thus , the electrical impulse leaps down the axon from node to node .
Once the electrical impulse has reached the terminus ( bouton ) of the axon , the ionic changes stimulate the release of neurotransmitters from storage vesicles to diffuse ( by exocytosis ) out of the bouton membrane and across the synaptic gap to bind to a receptor on the surface of the next cell ( neuron , muscle , etc . ) .
Classification of Neurotoxicants Neurotoxicants are legion and come from all categories , as can be seen from T7.6 .
Solvent neurotoxicity is commonly reported in the literature .
Neurologists classify neurotoxicants according to their own functional nomenclature , as follows .
When oxygen levels in the blood become too low , neurotransmitter release in the frontal lobe is affected , leading to impaired memory and reasoning .
Sites of Attack Receptor antagonists : atropine ( nightshade plant ) competitively bind cholinergic receptors , propanolol binds receptors of adrenalin and norepinephrine .
Anticholinesterase agents : organophosphate and carbamate insecticides increase stimulation of cholinergic nerves by impairing the destruction of acetylcholine in the synapse .
F7.3A points to the four vulnerable sites for neuronal damage by chemicals .
1. the dendritic end of the neuron , these fine , filamentous ( hair-like ) extensions having no protective myelination and only a thin membrane , 2. the cell body of the neuron is usually exposed , with very little protection other than the normal , thin , cell membrane , 3. the axon , either unmyelinated or myelinated , vulnerable because of its length and the necessity of transporting nutrients from the cell body to the bouton and the metabolic products back to the cell body .
Attack can occur at either the axon or the myelin , 4. at the bouton itself , with an effect on the membrane or on the neurotransmitters released .
Acetyl ethyl tetramethyl tetralin Adiponitrile Aniline Aryl phosphates Benzene Cadmium Carbon tetrachloride Chloroprene Acetyl pyridine Acrylamide Aluminium Arsine Barium p-Bromophenyl acetylures Carbon monoxide Chlordecone Cuprizone Dichlorodiphenyl trichloroethane [ DDT ] Ethylene dichloride Hydroquinone Leptophos Mercury Methyl chloride Nitrogen trichloride Organotins ( triethyltin ) Alkyl phosphates Arsenic , inorganic Azide Boron Carbon disulfide Chlordane Cobalt 2,4-Dichlorophenoxy acetic acid [ 2,4-D ] Diisopropyl fluorophosphate [ DFP ] Hexachlorophene Lead Malonitrile Methanol Methyl n-butyl ketone Organochlorine insecticides Paraquat Phenyl mercury Phthalate esters Selenium Tetrachlorobiphenyl Styrene Thallium Triorthocresylphosphate [ TOCP ] Zinc pyridinethione Cyanide Diethyl ether Trichloroethylene Zinc With a more functional view , the types of attack could be as follows : 1. on protein synthesis , 2. axonopathy , electrical impulse propagation along axons and axonal transport of nutrients using the microtubular system .
Axon degeneration usually starts at the end of the axon and grows proximally , 3. on neurotransmitter secretion , action and turnover , 4. myelinopathy , decay of myelin sheath .
The classic natural disease is multiple sclerosis , which results in pain , loss of coordination and vision .
Loss of myelin ( death of the Schwann cells ) affects nerve conduction velocity .
For example , heavy use of organic solvents can lead to walking problems .
CNS depression and anesthetic effects result .
However , repeated use of any of these may result in damage so extensive that repair and regeneration mechanisms can not cope .
There are about 100 billions cells in the adult brain .
This limited regeneration is an idiosyncrasy : adult canaries regenerate brain cells quite readily24 .
Neurons involved in olfaction and memory are produced into adulthood .
Fewer cells are produced as a consequence of aging , spikes in stress hormones , sleep deprivation , barren environments and Ritalin .
Developing brains may be more susceptible to chemicals .
Common anesthetics administered to children ( midazolam , nitrous oxide and isoflurane ) induce apoptosis in baby rat models , which leads to lasting memory and learning deficits .
Exposed rats took longer to learn and tended to forget quickly , probably because of observed cell deaths in the hippocampus .
In humans , delicate periods for brain development cover from the third trimester of pregnancy to 2-3 years after birth11 .
Anoxia can result from these agents , as well as excessive stimulation with excitatory transmitters , leading to `` organic against Staphylococcus Aureus .
Fortunately , it does not penetrate the skin well , and its toxicity was detected in burn victims .
Polyneuropathy can involve more than one mechanism , in the same way that more than one organ can be intoxicated by a single agent .
At the anatomical level , neuropathy can be peripheral or central .
A graphic loss of central neurons can be seen in Alzheimer ’ s disease ( bottom ) , where the temporal lobes formerly filled with neurons providing memory and language are now empty ventricles .
Reversible/Irreversible Effects In mammals , a severed nerve in an arm or leg regrows and reestablished functional connections .
A similar injury in the spinal cord or within the brain will not be repaired , resulting in permanent disability and paralysis .
Poor regeneration in the central nervous system has been attributed to proteins embedded in brain myelin ( the membranes that wrap each nerve axon ) , which interact with an inhibitory receptor on neurons called NgR .
Many acute exposures with low molecular weight compounds produce reversible effects in nervous tissue .
Fortunately , Mn contamination of water at dangerous levels gives it a nasty smell .
The difficulty of assessing clinically neurological disturbances is illustrated by the Gulf War syndrome , where marginal exposures to toxicants produced headaches , forgetfulness and mood disorders .
There is great conflict and discussion over the existence of the syndrome .
For example , toluene potentiates the toxicity of all other solvents , while methyl ethyl ketone potentiates the toxicity of n-hexane and methyl n-butylketone .
These effects are irreversible… Unborn children transplacentally exposed to methylmercury poisoning exhibit symptoms of cerebral palsy at birth .
Histology of the brain tissue after their death shows absence of myelin and astrocytes ( “ infantile ” brains without normal maturation ) .
PCBs were used as insulation for transformers and now taint most soils and water .
These effects in the children are permanent .
Utility workers used to wash their hands in PCBs , secure in the knowledge that PCBs were “ only dangerous when burnt ” ( furanes are then generated ) .
Permanent damage is also produced by DDT and manganese .
Myelin and Myelinopathy There are differences between myelination in the peripheral ( both sensory and motor ) and central nervous systems .
This is important to understand the distinction between central and peripheral myelinopathies induced by chemicals1 .
The myelin8 sheath in peripheral nerves is from a specific cell , the Schwann cell , which wraps itself around a portion of the neuronal axon in much the same fashion as a window roller blind .
The nucleus of the Schwann cell resides on the outer surface of the rolled myelin layers .
Myelin sheath anatomy in the peripheral and central nervous systems .
Two PBDEs have been phased out of production .
7-8 The junction between the edges of two Schwann cell myelin projections form the nodes of Ranvier , the point of neuronal depolarization , a thin `` tunnel '' into the membrane of the neuron .
Damage to a single Schwann cell can result in its death , with a gap of nonmyelinated axon surrounded by debris .
The neuron conducts pulses rapidly down to the point of the damage , but pulses slow down over the defect , resulting in the disruption of smooth conduction .
In contrast , in the CNS , the role of the Schwann cell is carried out by a specialized cell , the oligodendroglial cell which can produce a plethora of sheaths around several adjacent axons , rather than just on one axon .
Destruction of one oligodendroglial cell results in the changes in a group of neuronal axons , and may result in more than one observed adverse effect .
Unlike peripheral myelinopathy which tends to be relatively specific or localized in effect , a centrally located myelinopathy may appear quite diffuse .
Multiple sclerosis is one such myelinopathy .
Among chronically exposed workers , the disease is common but difficult to recognize because of highly variable , interindividual responses3 .
Individual diagnosis is difficult even with the best test batteries , each victim presenting one or a few symptoms2,3 .
Victims often present at a relatively young age with serious neurological sequelae from excessive exposure to solvents by inhalation , and are forced to retire from their work .
Most of the neuro-psychological symptoms appear to be relatively minor , but still involve demyelination in the central nervous system .
The effects are fatigue , sleplessness , headaches , irritability and nausea as well as memory and concentration difficulties .
The mechanisms by which solvents induce such effects is unclear and many theories exist .
However , many chemicals are capable of nonspecific interactions with neurological membrane phospholipids , causing instabilities and interference with conduction , as well as causing damage to Schwann or oligodendroglial cells and subsequent alterations in myelinated pathways .
The chronic symptoms are premature aging , memory impairment , mild depression and anxiety .
The least toxic are alcohols , esters and aliphatic hydrocarbons .
Aromatic hydrocarbons and most ketones are highly toxic , and halogenated derivatives of hydrocarbons damage the CNS , liver and kidneys .
They were at one time used in fastdrying glues in the shoe industry and responsible for outbreaks in several countries such as Japan , Italy , Turkey and USA .
The associated pathology , first detected in humans , was taken afterwards to animals models in rats and chickens .
Scientists 7-9 returned to the human situation with recommendations for modification of glue formulations , which produced fewer neurotoxic metabolites .
The neuropathy , reported among workers in the shoe industry , was always most severe in the early springtime , following a winter of closed doors and windows ( poor ventilation ) .
The signs and symptoms listed in T7.8 are matched morphologically with Ranvier paranodal swelling at the distal end of myelinated axons , with a progression of the swellings toward the proximal portion of the nerve axon .
These swellings cause disruption of the microtubule and neurofilament system responsible for the transport of nutrients to the distal part of the axon from the cell body , with eventual death and disintegration of the nerve endings .
Nutrients are no longer transported to the distal end .
The central-peripheral distal axonopathy , so named by neurologists because it affects distal axons of both the central and peripheral nervous systems , is caused by a reactive metabolite , 2,5-hexanedione , found to cyclize during further biotransformation to form a 5-membered ring ( imidazole ) that interacts with protein structures to disrupt neural organization and cause the tangles .
The complete mechanism has not been entirely identified , and interest has declined with the banning of n-hexane and methyl-butylketone and the substitution of other volatile ketones .
Weight loss Gradual onset of distal paresthesia Muscle weakness - distal ( hands , feet ) No ataxia or muscle spasticity Symmetrical dysfunction ( hands , feet ) Loss of sensation - “ stocking and glove ” Persistent muscular weakness Atrophy of musculature Experiments in animal models revealed that not only were the distal parts of fine nerves of the peripheral nervous system affected , but the distal portions of fine myelinated nerves in the spinal cord ( lumbar , sacral ) were also damaged , showing much the same morphology .
In the paranodal swellings tangles of microtubules and filaments were observed , giving the 7-10 This is seen in tunnel workers who inject an acrylamide resin using a pressurized lance into soil and rock to create an impervious , water-proof layer to prevent leaking .
Metals Neurotoxicity The term `` heavy metal '' describes a class of agents in the periodic table possessing certain chemical similarities , including a divalent positive ion .
The workers were exposed daily to high concentrations ( estimated as high as 2500 ppm , TLV = 50 ppm ) throughout the winter months when ventilation in homes and factories was poorest .
When such workers were removed from exposure , the condition was not alleviated , but continued to worsen for approximately 14 days , after which recovery began slowly .
The condition was only partly reversible .
The average blood lead level today in the US is less than 2 µg/dl .
OSHA will permit a worker to return to work at 40 µg/dL , after being medically removed from work because of lead poisoning .
Long-term exposure to low levels of lead may result in the development of learning and behavior problems , cardiovascular and kidney diseases , decreased fertility , hypertension and cancer25 .
Methyl-mercury is associated with the risk of myocardial infarction , and this partially offsets the protective effects of consuming fish26 .
It is probable that any lead in the blood decreases IQ .
The best predictor of lifelong IQ outcome is lead level in the blood at 2 years of age .
Similar effects on cognitive developments in children have recently been found in relation to Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons ( from combustion of fossil fuels ) 21 .
Children Lead is especially toxic to the central nervous system , affecting mental development and intelligence in children .
Behavioral disorders such as attention deficit disorder have also been attributed to lead exposure28 .
Studies of lead in city children initially drove the lowering of acceptable lead concentrations in the blood to 10 µg/dl .
But IQ in children further increases as blood levels are lowered to 5 µg/dl6 .
Lead acts by multiple mechanisms in the central nervous system4 .
In neurodevelopmental toxicity , interference with cell adhesion molecules causes a mis-wiring of the central nervous system during early development , and permanent dysfunction .
This is a major concern for young children who absorb lead much more efficiently than adults , and who may come into contact with higher levels than adults .
Acute lead poisoning kills children in the state of Zamfara , Nigeria A total of 163 children out of 355 cases from several remote villages have died of lead poisoning .
The state of Zamfara retained a Chinese company to mine gold in ground that also had high concentrations of lead , but villagers attempted to capitalise by illegally digging for the precious metal themselves .
The deaths were discovered during the country's annual immunisation programme , when officials realised there were virtually no children in several remote villages .
Villagers said the children had died of malaria , but blood tests from local people showed high concentrations of lead , pointing to death from lead encephalopathy .
It is likely locals became sick after lead removed during the process of refining gold ore contaminated local water systems .
Another toxic mechanism involves interactions between lead and other essential divalent cations ( calcium and zinc ) , these ions having vital roles in neurotransmission21 .
Early prenatal exposure to lead causes kids to have retinal deficits up to 10 years later .
In inorganic form , it is most injurious to the kidneys , while its organic form in very neurotoxic .
7-12 Mercury promotes the production of free radicals , and may bind selenium , which can not then serve as a cofactor for glutathione peroxidase .
Mercury may inactivate the antioxidant properties of glutathione , catalase , and superoxide dismutase .
Mercury intoxication has been also known as Minamata disease , the name of a city in Japan where the offspring of mothers who consumed fish poisoned by local industrial discharges were victims of mental retardation and absence of limbs .
Metallic mercury is poorly absorbed from the digestive system , but mercury as a vapor ( broken thermometer ) can cross the blood-brain barrier and accumulate in the central nervous system as well as in kidneys , lungs and fatty tissues .
It causes dysfunction , acute and chronic inflammation and results in a large variety of symptoms .
Such fillings are unacceptable today , in view of alternatives .
Inorganic mercury as calomel ( mercurous chloride ) was used for centuries by physicians , until it was realized that it did much more harm than good .
Only 10 % of inorganic mercury is absorbed by mouth , but it affects the digestive system at all levels .
The salts also damage the kidneys , leading to reduced urine flow and possible need for dialysis .
Organic forms of mercury easily travel through organic tissues and accumulate in brain , liver , kidney , blood , skin , hair and breast milk .
The body only excretes 1 % of its organic mercury load every day , and prognosis for this intoxication is very poor .
The symptoms are very similar to those of multiple sclerosis .
Dimethyl mercury penetrates disposable latex gloves in 15 seconds or less , is volatile and very lipid soluble .
The probably carcinogenic compounds have also been shown to act as estrogen mimics20 .
The dark brown pigments at top left in F7.11correspond to dopamine-producing neurons which oxidize dopamine to the pigment neuromelanin .
The normal brain at left shows more dopamine both in the histology ( dark brown cells ) and in the anatomical section ( black pigment ) than the Parkinson ’ s brain at right An effective therapy for the motor symptoms is the administration of levodopa which can cross the blood-brain barrier and act as a precursor of dopamine .
Although lesions in the dopaminergic system have been prominent in Parkinson ’ s research , this brain disease is not restricted to the substantia nigra .
Other areas of the brain , the spinal cord and the peripheral nervous system are affected in Parkinson ’ s , as are serotonin , norepinephrine and acetylcholine neurotransmission .
Postmortem studies suggest that the brain stem is first affected , then the substantia nigra-striatummidbrain , and finally the cerebral cortex .
One strange feature is that in the same individual , some neurons are affected while others are spared , which underlines our incomplete understanding of this disease .
Histology of the pars compacta in the substantia nigra .
Section of the top of the brainstem ( hole is the central canal ) at the level of the substantia nigra .
Older people in Guam and in Guadeloupe are victims of a disease very similar to Parkinson 's .
There are many indications that Parkinsons ' s is related to toxic exposure in the environment , an association long suspected by epidemiologists .
As in many neurological diseases , it is difficult for clinicians to determine if a drug therapy actually slows ( or reverses ) the death of brain cells , or just improves brain function , so that it compensates for the loss of cells .
Until this distinction can be 7-16 made , the various attempts to deal with the disease by preventing the death of neurons may not be productive .
Acetylcholine will stimulate both of them , but muscarine and nicotine are selective .
The sites of action may be anywhere in the body , but the mechanism is very specific , as depicted in F7.17 .
Toxicants can have effects on muscarinic and nicotinic receptors and on acetyl-cholinesterase itself ( the enzyme responsible for degradation of acetylcholine in the synapse ) .
Toxicants can interfere with neurotransmitter release , stimulation of receptors or the breakdown of acetylcholine by acetycholinesterase .
The mechanisms for cell killing are in red , interventions to prevent cell loss are in blue-gray .
7-17 For example , organophosphates react with a serine hydroxyl group at the active site of acetylcholinesterase , inactivating the hydrolytic function .
In acute or moderate chronic exposures , neuromuscular weakness occurs because of down-regulation of receptor activity .
The diaphragm is a red muscle dependent on acetylcholinesterase , therefore breathing can be affected .
It was shown that children are born with detectable concentrations of many pesticides in their blood and are exposed further through breast milk .
Many studies30,31,32 have confirmed that children exposed to high pesticide levels in the womb have lower average IQs than other kids .
The most heavily exposed children scored an average of 7 points lower on IQ tests compared with children with the lowest pesticide exposures .
Since pesticide exposure after birth wasn ’ t linked to lower intelligence scores , this suggests that the harm caused by the chemicals is greatest during early pregnancy , when the brain is developing .
Earlier studies have linked organophosphate pesticides with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) .
Intoxication is treatable with atropine , which competitively binds the receptors of cholinergic nerves .
Women in times past would administer themselves atropine to dilate their pupils before going to court or meeting prospective important lovers .
Mexican children from `` Foothills '' ( Yaqui Indians ) have only one major exposure to pesticides : DDT spraying by the government to control malaria .
`` Valley '' farmers apply pesticides 45 times per crop year and also tend to use household bug sprays daily .
These exposures are not significantly different from those in other intensely farmed areas .
Chemical Warfare Agents Neurobehavioral testing of exposed children in Mexico by the University of Arizona showed that exposed children had : less stamina , poorer gross and fine eye-hand coordination , weaker 30-minute recall and impaired drawing ability ( F7.18 ) .
The military are trained to inject themselves with atropine in case of a neurotoxic attack .
Organophosphorus warfare agents as well as insecticides can also be countered by certain drugs such as galantamine , a reversible centrally-acting acetylcholinesterase inhibitor .
Although cells are used to test for neurotoxicity , these models have not made great inroads yet .
The patient complained of weakness , nervousness , weight loss , shakiness and difficulty in reading and driving because he could not focus his eyes .
The physician thought that the exposure to Kepone might have caused the patient 's illness and sent a blood sample to the CDC for a determination of Kepone content .
The CDC used to have a service for physicians in which , on request , would analyze adipose tissues , blood samples , and other biologic samples for content of chlorinated hydrocarbon pesticides .
The chemist at CDC who received the sample , not realizing the emergency , thought that the Virginia physician had previously arranged for such an analysis .
He therefore accepted the sample , analyzed it , and found very high Kepone levels .
He thought his analysis was wrong , so he repeated it three times before he said anything about it to anyone .
In the meantime , the patient visited a neurologist at the Medical College of Virginia .
The patient 's symptoms and signs now included extreme nervousness , tremor , ataxia , skin rash , and an odd rolling of the eyes called opsoclonus .
Neurotoxicity testing is complicated by the need to differentiate between CNS and peripheral nerve damage , as well as between reversible and permanent lesions .
There is some discussion about the definition of the “ normal ” range appropriate for various results , which is often defined purely by statistics , as opposed to specific thresholds .
In animals models , performance tests such as maze , movement recording and platforms hidden within pools are frequent .
7-19 Ultimately , the high Kepone blood level determined at CDC was reported to the neurologist at the medical college and also to the requesting physician .
Once absorbed , Kepone will be stored in body tissues for a significant period of time .
It is the only representative of the group of persistent halogenated pesticides that is not predominantly stored in adipose tissue .
The ratio between blood and adipose tissue is not as large as for other chlorinated aromatic pesticides and industrial chemicals , and a great deal of Kepone is stored in the liver , because of its greater polarity .
After this case was uncovered , we needed some facts about the plant in which the man worked .
Several phone calls were made in an attempt to gather information .
The neurologist was asked to question the patient about other employees to determine if a larger problem existed .
The patient reported that employees at the plant were unable to even drink much coffee during their breaks because they shook so severely they would spill the coffee , or would be unable to fill their cups , an indication that all probably had Kepone-caused tremor .
This was reported to the Virginia state health department ; it became apparent that somebody needed to take direct action .
The state epidemiologist inspected the plant and closed it , all within two days .
It was a small facility operating out of an old garage .
There were no facilities in which the employees could change clothes or wash , and no separate eating facilities .
It was difficult to understand how people could be affected so profoundly-some people were unable to stand up from a chair-and still continue to work without realizing they were being affected by the chemical .
In addition to the rash and nervousness noticed in the index case , many people complained of chest pains , but it was not possible to determine a cause for that complaint .
A divorced worker at the plant even seemed to have Kepone-related problems with alimony pay .
He would begin to feel sick after working with Kepone , would stay home with no pay .
His ex-wife , thinking this an intentional avoidance of work , went to court , and the man would find himself in jail for failure to support her .
While in jail , he would recover ; and then he would resume work at the Kepone plant , become sick again , and the whole cycle would repeat .
Other workers felt that perhaps they were being affected by Kepone , yet they had been told , `` This compound doesn't really do anything .
In addition to the workers , residents in the neighborhood were also examined , as well as employees ' family members .
Sometimes it is difficult to conduct these types of examinations and evaluations objectively because of publicity about the problem .
As mentioned , the workers were unable to change clothes at the plant .
Workers often carry dust of the chemicals they are working with -particularly persistent compounds , including chlorinated hydrocarbons , lead , and asbestos- home on their clothes and in their cars , thus exposing their families .
Many family members of the employees had Kepone blood levels .
They were lower than those of the plant employees , but they were higher than what might be expected in the general population .
The Kepone produced at this plant was manufactured for export to other countries .
Kepone is not registered for use in the United States , so normally Kepone blood levels are not observed in the general U.S. population .
The plant was closed and never reopened .
The James River was found to be contaminated with Kepone and was closed to fishing for a while .
The state of Virginia is still struggling with the problems resulting from this episode of contamination .
Neuropsychological performance and solvent exposure among car body repair shop workers .
Mechanisms of lead neurotoxicity , or looking beyond the lamppost .
Chronic systemic pesticide exposure reproduces features of Parkinson 's disease .
Role of metabolism in hexacarbon neuropathy .
Major neurological disease and occupational exposure to organic solvents .
Intellectual Impairment in Children with Blood Lead Concentrations below 10 µg per Deciliter .
Early Exposure to Common Anesthetic Agents Causes Widespread Neurodegeneration in the Developing Rat Brain and Persistent Learning Deficits .
Translocation of inhaled ultrafine particles to the brain .
Effective countermeasure against poisoning by organophosphorus insecticides and nerve agents .
Neonatal exposure to perfluorooctane sulfonate ( PFOS ) and perfluorooctanoic acid ( PFOA ) cause deranged behaviour and increased susceptibility of the cholinergic system in adult mice .
Society of Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 27th Annual Meeting in North America .
Effects of prenatal exposure to airborne polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons on neurodevelopment in the first three years of life among inner-city children .
Electroconvulsive seizures regulate gene expression of distinct neurotrophic signaling pathways .
Neurobehavioral aspects of lead neurotoxicity in children .
Exposure of children to heavy metals from smelters : Epidemiology and toxic consequences .
Prenatal Exposure to Organophosphate Pesticides and IQ in 7-Year-Old Children .
Action of Toxicants in the Liver .
Roles of the Liver The largest gland , the liver performs over 500 known functions .
1 ) Metabolism of foods ( fats , carbohydrates , amino acids and proteins ) and most amino acid interconversions and catabolism , bile secretion to enhance the uptake of dietary lipids and vitamins , urea formation ( excretion of nitrogen ) , storing vitamins A and D. 2 ) It stabilizes the glucose level by taking up and storing glucose as glycogen , breaking it down back to glucose when needed , as well as forming glucose from noncarbohydrate sources such as amino acids .
Hypoglycemia occurs only late in the course of severe liver disease , because the liver has a large functional reserve , maintaining its function with only 20 % of the liver functioning .
Most cholesterol synthesis takes place in the liver .
The Roman anatomist Galen ( 200 AD ) made the liver the principal organ of the human body , arguing in his text “ On the Usefulness of the Parts of the Body ” that it emerged first in the formation of a fetus .
After acute toxic exposure one finds : lipid accumulation in hepatocytes , necrosis or hepatobiliary dysfunction .
Some forms of liver injury are reversible , while others are not .
8-2 For example , hemoglobin transformed to bilirubin is conjugated with glucoronic acid ( both shown ) in the liver , and the xenobiotics Hg and Pb are excreted in the bile… Glucoronic acid also conjugates excess estrogens , the resulting products exiting unchanged through the kidneys .
Cats are vulnerable to many toxicants because of their limited ability to form glucuronide conjugates .
Anatomy The liver is the source of the veins and the principal instrument of sanguification , Galen observed .
He was not far off the mark , given the organ 's position in the circulatory system ( F8.2 ) and its role in intermediary metabolism and biotransformation of xenobiotics .
Note the blue portal vein in the center of the diagram , and how blood flows from the various components of the digestive system into the portal vein .
Blood output is into the vena cava .
First-Pass The First Pass effect refers to the influx of toxicants through the portal vein ( F8.2 ) , particularly from the digestive system and to the high level of bio-transformation in the liver .
8-3 On entering the liver , the blood vessels break up into a dense capillary bed , the blood pressure decreases sharply and there is slow perfusion of the blood through the sinusoids , permitting the bordering cells to extract chemicals from the bloodstream by passive diffusion ( F8.3 ) .
The functional unit of the liver , the hepatic lobule , is a radial array centered on the central vein .
Branches of three conduits converge towards the center : portal vein , hepatic artery and bile duct .
The blood of sinusoids flows towards the center , the bile in the canaliculi away from the center , towards a branch of the bile duct .
The sinusoidal lining is fenestrated , allowing chemicals easy access to the hepatocytes , which make up the bulk of the organ .
Endothelial cells differ from the vascular endothelium elsewhere in the body in that they lack a basement membrane and contain numerous fenestrae that permit hepatocytes to have ready access to nutrients and macromolecules in plasma .
Endothelial cells are also responsible for endocytosis of molecules and particles , and play a role in lipoprotein metabolism .
They form an important part of the body 's reticuloendothelial system .
Their major functions include phagocytosis of foreign particles , removal of endotoxins and other noxious substances , and modulation of the immune response through the release of mediators and cytotoxic agents .
They transform into fibroblasts in response to hepatic injury , contributing to hepatic fibrosis .
 Fibroblasts secrete collagen fibers and provide mechanical tension to close wounds .
The extracellular matrix of the liver includes its reticulin framework and several molecular forms of collagen , laminin , fibronectin and other extracellular glycoproteins .
After Phase II metabolism in the liver and excretion in the bile , intestinal flora releases it in native form , allowing reabsorption .
Hg is excreted in the bile .
If in the form of methyl mercury , it is reabsorbed from the biliary tract , contributing to its long half-life .
The blood in the liver has a low oxygen content , probably to reduce oxidation reactions .
The histologic appearance of the liver is shown in F8.4 .
Up to 95 % of bile is reabsorbed through the entero-hepatic loop , and bile plays a large role in the regenerative ability of the liver .
This regeneration is tied to the stimulation by the bile of the FXR gene and protein , which acts as a bile sensor .
It is the only internal human organ known to naturally regenerate , from just 25 % of its tissue .
There is a gradation of activity from portal input to vein output .
Phase I activities increase 5-fold from the portal input to the central vein output .
Phase II conjugating enzymes levels ( such as glutathione transferase and glucuronyltransferase ) decrease approximately 4-fold from the portal input to the central vein output .
Compounds that are metabolized ( or not ) and excreted into the bile duct may be re-absorbed from the small intestine before excretion , resulting in increased toxic exposure .
What does this organization signify when considering toxic reactions in the liver , specifically in avoiding irreversible damage to hepatocytes ?
Since Phase I reactive intermediates are particularly toxic , it is also probably better to provide less enzyme at the portal input , where the highest toxicant concentration is expected .
This spreads out Phase I biotransformation and toxic stress more uniformly over the lobule .
Phase II enzymes , less likely to increase toxic stress , may be spread according to the increased availability of bio-synthetic Phase II activity is cast back to a lower basal rate , Phase II being the rate-limiting step in many detoxifications .
These patterns of enzyme expression are not inflexible across species or across time .
In male rats , hepatic enzyme distributions alter during aging .
Peroxisomes ( Phase I ) are more active in pericentral than periportal hepatocytes , in contrast to the uniform pattern in young animals .
Enzyme levels are significantly altered in aged animals , perhaps contributing to disturbances in lipid metabolism .
A chemical toxic to the liver may be more toxic when ingested or injected intra-peritoneally than when absorbed through lungs or skin , because disposition of the toxicant to other body compartments will lower the effective concentration to the liver .
Steroidogenic P450s are found both in prokaryotes and in the mitochondria and smooth endoplasmic reticulum of eukaryotes .
Once enzyme reserves are depleted ,  Genetic induction of supplementary catalase in mitochondria has been shown to increase the life-span of rats by 15 % .
8-6 necessary for the maintenance of cell wall integrity and cellular differentiation .
cytoplasm of the cell as soluble enzymes .
If the cell copes successfully with this defensive mechanism , the levels of these enzymes will slowly decline back to normal .
If it does not , the levels of Phase I and II enzymes will remain Xenobiotic P450s are found in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum of eukaryotes and metabolize foreign biological substances .
There are about 12,000 members across all forms of life , the human ones being encoded by 57 human genes .
This group of P450s appears to have evolved from the steroidogenic P450s during the era of plant-animal differentiation , conveying a survival advantage by allowing animals to detoxify the substances that they consumed .
If hepatocytes encounter a moderate or high level of biotransformable chemicals ( say carbon tetrachloride ) , the cells induce synthesis of additional Phase I and Phase II enzymes .
The synthesis is not selective for individual enzymes , rather , a broad spectrum of enzymatic activities are turned on , with the capability of biotransforming a vast array of exogenous chemicals .
This is compatible with adaptation to natural toxins which usually come as a group of related compounds , rather than as a single purified molecule .
This involves the synthesis of messenger RNA ( mRNA ) which is used by the cellular rough endoplasmic reticulum ( RER ) to synthesize proteins ( Phase I and II enzymes ) which are either incorporated into a subcellular membranous organelle - the smooth endoplasmic reticulum ( SER ) or released into the F8.7 .
A wide range of compounds are able to induce increased levels of cytochrome P450 enzymes .
Some toxicants are inhibitors of biotransformation .
They achieve the effect through competitive binding , synthesis inhibition of heme or cytochrome P450 , inactivationdestruction of cytochrome P450 or of the endoplasmic reticulum .
presents with more obvious symptoms such as yellowing of the skin , liver enlargement , itchy skin , dark urine , pale stool , easy bleeding , blood sugar problems and gallstones .
Liver enlargement is an effect frequently observed in pesticide toxicity studies .
Paradoxically , more benzene is metabolized to toxic species at low doses than at high doses !
Liver cells in culture show a progressive fall in expression of xenobiotics metabolism ( 1-2 days ) , and although some human B-lymphoblastoid cell lines can be engineered to stably express human cytochromes P450 , it has been very difficult to maintain true toxic metabolism in vitro .
The fish do not need to consume the seaweed , just be in the neighborhood !
The rough nature of such a procedure is clear if we consider that even if the two chemicals have quite identical doseresponses , they are unlikely to have similar half-lives .
Pathology Decreased liver function can result in any number of symptoms including fatigue , allergies and chemical sensitivities , acne or broken blood vessels on the skin , intolerance to fatty foods or alcohol , changes in mood or weight , changes in cholesterol or triglyceride levels , nausea and constipation .
Cirrhosis often results in jaundice and portal hypertension .
A cholestatic agent triggers inflammation of the biliary tree with a decrease in bile flow and excretion .
Cytotoxic Agents Cholestatic Agents Acetaminophen Anabolic steroids Aflatoxin Arsphenamine Allyl alcohol Chlorpromazine Bromobenzene Diazepam Carbon Tetrachloride Estradial Dimethylnitrosamine Mepazine Phosphorous Trioridazine Urethane 8.4.1 .
The Liver Lobule areas endangered by Hepatotoxins .
Periportal Midzonal Acrolein Albitocin Allyl alcohol Arsenic Iron Manganese Phosphorous Anthrapyrimidine Beryllium Carbon tetrachloride Furosemide Ngaione Paraquat Centrilobular Acetaminophen Aflatoxin Bromobenzene Carbon tetrachloride Chloroform DDT Dinitrobenzene Trichloroethylene 8.4.2 .
Membrane , Endoplasmic Reticulum Carbon tetrachloride Thioacetamide Phallodin Dimethylnitrosamine Allyl alcohol Mitochondria Nucleus Hydrazine Ethionine Dichloroethylene Carbon tetrachloride Phosphorous Beryllium Aflatoxin Galactosamine Ethionine Nitrosamines F8.12 .
Large parts of this liver are invaded by carcinoma nodules ( mostly to the left ) .
Another important pathology of the liver is hepatocellular carcinoma , characterized by large malignant tumors throughout the liver ( shown ) and hepatomegaly .
Substances promoting Detoxification Vitamin C is required for Phase 1 detoxification , scavenges free radicals and protects against damage from reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) .
Reduced glutathione interacts with toxins such as heavy metals to make them less reactive and thereby less damaging to cells .
The oxidized glutathione needs to be replenished .
Toxicants such as mercury are removed from the body by direct conjugation with glutathione11 .
Glutathione can be depleted with increased free radical production during Phase 1 detoxification , resulting in decreased glutathione conjugation in Phase 2 detoxification , and the build up of toxins and heavy metals in the liver .
Lipoic acid supplementation may be beneficial for the management of liver diseases associated with oxidative stress : alcohol-induced damage , mushroom poisoning , metal toxicity and carbon tetrachloride poisoning10 .
Action of Toxicants in the Liver The quest for potency and efficacy in pharmaceuticals leads industry to purify the active ingredients of natural medicines , so that they can then be synthesized in pure form .
Pure forms of medicines may reduce toxicity from other ingredients , but may also concentrate metabolic stress on specific pathways .
Depending on the toxicity of a therapeutic , it may sometimes be advantageous to use natural extracts , which may induce less toxicity as well as take advantage of an array of molecules with similar action .
Clinically , attempts are made to remove it from the body by dialysis and charcoal ingestion .
Atropine would be administered to counter its debilitating effects on the nervous system .
Enzymatic Activation of Toxicity The liver ’ s metabolism can activate toxicity in its attempts at detoxification .
We show here three examples in which this occurs .
Acetaminophen Bromobenzene results in centrilobular necrosis and is also a powerful nephrotoxicant .
Approved drugs are frequently recalled from the market , and clinical trials of experimental drugs are often terminated early because of drug-induced liver injury .
NAC has a foul smell and tastes like rotten eggs .
Not surprisingly , nausea and vomiting commonly occur following administration .
Peak plasma levels of NAC occur approximately one hour after an oral dose and at 12 hours post-dose it is undetectable in plasma .
Despite a relatively low bioavailability of only four to ten percent , oral administration of NAC appears to be clinically effective .
The biological activity of NAC is attributed to its sulfhydryl group ( yellow ) , while its acetyl substituted amino group affords it protection against oxidative and metabolic processes .
As can be seen in F8.15A , acetaminophen adducts are formed specifically in this region .
Stained with brown antibody specific to acetaminophen adducts the centrilobular regions .
Josephy The nomogram below ( F.8.16 ) is a nice application of toxicokinetics , but should not be used to downgrade the administration of NAC over time .
NAC is a good example of a compound which can have deleterious or protective effects , depending on its compartimentalization .
In F8.17 , the number of mutant cells produced as a function of NAC concentration is plotted for two cases : pretreatment and simultaneous treatment with NAC .
In pretreatment , NAC is first metabolized to increased intracellular glutathione , which enhances activation of MNNG near the target molecule , after it enters the cells .
In simultaneous treatment , MNNG is activated by NAC extracellularly , and the reactive intermediate harmlessly reacts with extracellular water .
Mutagenicity of MNNG depending on the timing and concentration of NAC treatment .
The isolation and identification of these unstable intermediates has been extremely difficult .
Hepatic biotransformation proceeds too rapidly , but biotransformation by renal homogenates or fractions is much slower , and we now know all of the toxic products arising from carbon tetrachloride biotransformation .
Other haloforms show the same property .
Carbon tetrachloride is still used as an antiparasitic agent ( vermifuge ) in third-world nations because it is cheap and effective , and can be administered orally in capsules .
include protracted nausea and vomiting , severe prostration , jaundice , enlarged palpable liver ( right side below rib cage or below sternum ) and elevated serum transferases .
8-14 Via a needle biopsy , one can see swollen cells and fatty degeneration , predominantly in the centrilobular area but radiating out toward the portal triads ( the mid-zonal regions of the lobule ) , as coagulative necrosis .
Cells around the central vein have a pale appearance upon staining and contain large fat globules .
A gradient in necrotic damage is seen from the central vein out into the mid-zonal regions , most severe in the central vein region .
It is apparent that the Kupffer cells play some role in carbon tetrachloride induced hepatotoxicity5 .
Carbon tetrachloride appears to activate Kupffer cells by increasing their intracellular levels of calcium ions which , in turn , trigger the release of cytokines and eicosanoids ( leukotrienes ) .
Those are chemotactic factors for neutrophils which become activated , are attracted to the region , and secrete superoxide anion and other toxic mediators which amplify the inflammatory response leading to cell injury and death .
It is important to appreciate that the above mechanism of hepatotoxicity is not unique to carbon tetrachloride but applies to all haloalkanes and alkenes and , perhaps , to other hepatotoxicants as well .
Back in the 1960s , there was considerable concern about the severe hepatotoxicity witnessed when halothane was first used as an anesthetic .
Halothane was almost `` finished '' in the marketplace before it was realized that the anesthesia machines through which it was administered had copper kettles in which the anesthetic was placed before air was passed over it .
Of course , halothane is covered with halogens ( F , Cl , and Br ) which react in the presence of copper to produce a toxic intermediate which the next patient receives when anesthetized .
When the copper chamber was replaced by glass , hepatotoxicity dropped sharply .
Activation of halothane by reductive and oxidative dehalogenation .
Their role in rat and human liver toxicity .
8-15 enhances the biotransformation of other chemicals to which the subject may be exposed .
Natural Hepatotoxicants Cyanobacterial blooms often take place in lakes during sustained warm spells in autumn .
The toxins attack a protein in the membrane of liver cells , and the cell membrane breaks down .
Structures of persistent halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons capable of long-term induction of tissue enzymes .
Persistence of Hepatotoxicity Many chemicals can exert subtle effects on the liver , specifically those that the liver finds difficult to biotransform , or the liposoluble ones that penetrate cell membranes and are stored in the body for exceptionally long periods of time .
Detectable blood levels of brominated and chlorinated dioxins can be demonstrated 35 years after exposure3 .
The effects of these agents during that period are uncertain .
We all possess low adipose tissue stores of DDT and PCBs that are slowly released .
The oldest example of such agents is the insecticide DDT , not very toxic , difficult to biotransform , highly liposoluble , persistent for decades both in environmental food chains and in the human body .
Much of the body burden is stored in the adipose tissue , with a small amount circulating in the bloodstream .
TCDD is the most toxic of the congeners to animals .
The liver treats such agents as if they were a high level exposure situation , even though the level may be quite modest .
If the liver can not biotransform the agent , enzymes are induced in the hope of eliminating them .
This is the liver 's only response to a situation that is perplexing to it .
However , the resistant chemicals remain and the elevated enzymatic activity The Phase I and II enzymes will not decline back to normal , since the agent persists in the bloodstream , maintaining an alert state .
Tests of Liver Function Tests of hepatic injury are serum enzyme tests ( below ) , hepatic excretion tests ( sulfobromophthalein , indocyanine green ) , tests on alteration of the liver ’ s chemical constituents and histological analysis of liver injury .
Current hepatic tests in the clinic are blood tests that detect the presence of damage or inflammation , rather than how well the liver functions .
through the hepatocellular membrane , with sharp elevations of these species in serum where only low 8-16 levels are usually found .
This may persist for prolonged periods of time .
Particularly with PCBs , one will find elevated serum triglycerides and sometimes cholesterol , as well as serum enzymes and dermatological acne for months and even years1,2 .
The same can be seen in humans .
However , hepatocellular damage occurs at different rates with different chemicals , and one blood sample may not yield the desired diagnostic results .
For example , benzene will produce damage ( and enzyme release ) in approximately 8 hr whereas , with carbon tetrachloride , it takes more than 24 hr before significant cellular damage and enzyme leakage occurs .
Fasting Serum Bile Acid ( SBA ) determination can be used clinically in the diagnosis and prognosis of liver disease in conjunction with standard liver function tests .
Because of the sensitivity of SBA determination as compared to standard liver function tests , SBA offers significant additional diagnostic information concerning liver function , especially in minor hepatic derangements .
It is of particular benefit in the determination of hepatic dysfunction as a result of chemical environmental injury .
Liver injury as a result of occupational or environmental exposure to a wide variety of chemical substances can be determined to a much finer degree by SBA than by standard liver enzymes , especially when the liver has been only slightly damaged .
Albumin is a major protective blood protein formed in the normal liver .
Prothrombin Time : clot formation is indicative of liver function .
Blood from the patient is oxalated to prevent coagulation .
Later , large amounts of calcium and tissue extract are mixed in .
In Vitro Liver Experimentation A number of products are available on the market to experiment in vitro on liver function .
Cryopreserved hepatocytes should be stored at less than -150ºC to assure longterm viability .
Temporary Liver Support Liver regeneration may actually occur from bone marrow cells , as was recently found .
First , bone marrow stem cells may serve as a source for the replacement of endothelial cells .
ALP and SGGT reflect cholestatic injury more effectively than necrotic injury .
LDH , AST and ALT are more sensitive to cytotoxic hepatic injury .
These enzyme determinations are less sensitive than histological pathology .
Case Study : Acute Dimethyl Nitrosamine Poisoning The child died .
The next day the man died .
The county health department wanted to know what they should do , what kind of tests they should run , and what kind of samples they should take from the man .
The CDC suggested that , in addition to taking tissues as is normally done for microscopic examination , they should also freeze tissue so that chemical analysis could be performed on the tissue if it became necessary to do so .
( modified from Williams & Burson ) In Omaha , Nebraska , the county health department became concerned because there seemed to be an outbreak of a new disease ; five people had suddenly become ill .
The sick patients experienced vomiting , severe abdominal cramps , diarrhea , and two of them developed bruising .
The first person had become ill on a Sunday morning while painting his house .
The man who had become ill early Sunday morning went to emergency rooms and then to a number of physicians , but he was repeatedly told he had the flu and should go home , rest , and take aspirin .
Later , he developed severe nosebleeds ; his nose was packed twice in emergency rooms early in the week .
After each episode he was sent home again .
On admission he showed abnormal liver function tests .
The fact that his bilirubin was elevated also indicated a liver problem .
The reason for the bleeding problems was that his platelets were severely decreased ; there were about 6,000/mm3 instead of the 150,000-300,000/mm3 or more that would be normal .
The autopsies of the father and child produced two common findings .
One was that severe liver damage was the cause of death .
In addition , there was extensive bleeding owing to the decrease in platelets .
There were no other significant findings .
No other organs were specifically affected .
Review of the liver sections and other organs did not suggest an infection , because there was no inflammatory reaction in the tissues .
The question was , what type of chemical would produce these toxic effects ?
Quite a number of chemicals damage the liver , but they usually affect other organs as well .
Because the investigation implicated the lemonade and the people had not complained about the lemonade 's tasting peculiar , the chemical had to be something that did not taste strange and something that was water soluble .
These observations somewhat limited the number of compounds .
The substance also had to be relatively toxic so that a person would ingest a lethal dose by drinking a single or a half glass of lemonade in which this material was dissolved .
At the CDC we examined a number of the more common compounds that cause liver necrosis .
We did not include in the list of compounds substances that , like carbon tetrachloride , severely affect the liver but also affect the sensorium Carbon tetrachloride also has some effect on the kidneys but would be detected by people drinking lemonade .
Portions of the liver tissues were examined for arsenic and yellow phosphorus .
None of this made very much sense .
It can damage the liver , but typically not everyone in a family suddenly becomes ill. Usually there is a history of the patient's having taken this medication , but these patients had not taken acetaminophen .
Aflatoxin , a mycotoxin and another hepatotoxin was also a suspect , but it would be very difficult to have access to this type of compound .
Furthermore , the microscopic appearance of the liver did not suggest aflatoxin .
However , certain types of alkylating agents that are either used in cancer chemotherapy or cancer research might selectively damage the liver and could cause the severe centrilobular liver necrosis .
In talking to the county health department , I asked for additional information about the family to determine whether they would have had any contact with people in a cancer research institute or a hospital .
The county health department thought this was a peculiar idea , but passed the request on to the police .
A police officer in Omaha went to his files and found that this family did indeed know a man who was now working at the Eppley Institute in Omaha , which is a cancer research institute .
Because he became comatose , the child of the family who had visited the home on Sunday afternoon had already been admitted to another hospital .
It took the hospitals a while to recognize that there might be a connection between the two cases .
Once that was established , the county health department was called .
The county health department then started looking at the other people who had visited the home and eventually established that of this group-a total of ten people who had been involved-five were ill and all of them had abnormal liver function tests .
They all had low platelet counts .
Not all of the people had platelet counts as low as those of the man or of the child who had visited the home .
After interviewing all who had visited the home on the Sunday when the illnesses were first noticed , the health department investigators concluded that the vehicle for the illness-causing agent must have been food or drink .
The only food item all the ill people had consumed was lemonade .
The parents of the man who had first become ill had visited the home , but while they were there , they did not consume any food or drink ; they did not become ill. A sister living with the first family did not drink lemonade and did not become ill ; and a baby did not eat any foods because it was being breastfed .
The fact that the baby did not become ill eliminated to some extent the possibility of a highly contagious illness ( except possibly a food-borne organism ) .
8-19 Five years earlier this man had had a love affair with the wife of the man who later died , and had confronted the family with a gun ; shots had been fired .
He had then been sentenced to prison and was free on parole .
Because he held a degree in biology , he was able to obtain a job at the Eppley Institute .
His job was to mix diets for cancer research studies in animals , and one of the compounds he was working with was the alkylating agent dimethyl nitrosamine .
The essential chemical structure of dimethyl nitrosamine is however .
We were able to show this in court and the man who poisoned the family was convicted .
Present state of knowledge and future perspective .
Carbon tetrachloride toxicity potentiated by isopropyl alcohol .
The involvement of Kupffer cells in carbon tetrachloride toxicity .
Serum bile acid concentrations as a liver function test in workers occupationally exposed to organic solvents .
Nuclear receptor-dependent bile acid signaling is required for normal liver regeneration .
Mechanisms of mercury disposition in the body .
Generalized structure of N-nitroso compounds Dimethyl nitrosamine was eventually established as the compound that caused the illness and death in the family .
While the family was away from their house , the suspect had climbed into a back window and added the poison to a pitcher of lemonade found in the refrigerator .
His intention was to cause the people to have cancer ; he wanted to watch them die .
The calculated lethal amount required for a child is less than one gram and for an adult roughly three grams .
Dimethyl nitrosamine is a yellow oil , so it mixes very well with lemonade .
It is somewhat more stable in a slightly acid environment .
Other nitrosamines were examined to determine whether some other compound could have produced the effects evident in this case .
They were ruled out for a number of reasons , and they were also not available at the institute .
Many are not nearly as toxic , and the other more toxic nitrosamines do not specifically cause the selective centrilobular liver necrosis .
Dimethyl nitrosamine is very rapidly metabolized and excreted ; therefore , five days after poisoning ( the time that elapsed before investigation of this case began ) , all of the material would be metabolized and excreted and would not be found in the body .
Nitrosamines and other alkylating agents do one thing by which they can be traced , however .
There is now a test that has been developed , using high pressure liquid chromatography , by which methylation of guanine can actually be measured .
Early in our investigation liver tissue from one of our patients was frozen .
A total of eight tissue samples were then blindly submitted for analysis : seven controls and our sample .
The chemist analyzed the eight samples and identified methylated guanine in the liver specimen that turned out to be our sample .
Products like methylated guanine are also excreted in urine and would also probably be measurable in urine specimens .
It is presently not possible to demonstrate methylation with acute yet nontoxic doses because the method is presently not sensitive enough .
The amount of the concentration found in the liver of the adult male was as high as those demonstrated in rats that have been acutely poisoned with dimethyl nitrosamine , 8-20 9.1 .
Roles of the Kidney The kidney is the main organ responsible for the expulsion of endogenous metabolites and xenobiotics .
There are indications that mothers restricted in protein give rise to offspring with fewer nephrons .
The remaining overworked nephrons release hormones and retain sodium .
The length , the large surface area and the thin barrier between the lumen of the tubule and the extensive capillary blood supply ( F9.2 ) insures a rapid transport of many substances .
Approximately 20 to 25 % of the blood pumped out of the heart each minute is routed through the kidneys .
Therefore , the overall personality of the kidney is that it is a recycling organ .
In F9.2 , note that the medulla consists only of tubular structures for blood and urine and that the glomeruli are located in the cortex .
The nephron is a very active tissue , as glomerular filtration occurs on-goingly with tubular secretion and reabsorption .
While low exposure levels of toxicants probably pose no problems for the kidney , moderate and high levels might .
Physiology Xenobiotics biotransformed into water soluble products will most likely be excreted by passive filtration through the glomerulus and into the urine .
The control results from the combined effects of the various buffer systems , particularly the carbonate , phosphate and ammonia buffer systems .
For example , the glucuronide of the xenobiotic phenol is more polar and more water soluble at pH 6.5 than at pH 7.4 ( the pH of the blood ) , and so can be more easily eliminated .
For organic bases , the acid pH of the urine enhances the polarity of the excreted product and insures that it remains in the fluid , and is not re-absorbed .
According to the HendersonHasselbalch equation , a miniscule amount is non-ionized in the plasma , but lowering the urine pH allows for somewhat increased passive reabsorption .
Its usefulness may be that it acts as an antioxidant in the blood .
Some detoxification products , particularly those conjugated to glutathione , may be partially reabsorbed and may be toxic at the point of entry .
Metabolism of Calcium Calcium concentration in the blood is controlled by parathyroid hormone , which prevents it from falling too low , and by calcitonin , which prevents it from going too high .
In diarrhea , several grams of Ca can be passed in the feces each day .
Parathyroid hormone secretion allows complete reabsorption of Ca in the kidneys .
The tubular processes of secretion are controlled by a number of endogenous substances .
Aldosterone It controls blood volume and therefore maintains blood pressure , by enhancing salt reabsorption in the tubule , which is followed by a corresponding water intake .
Renin , from the juxtaglomerular cells , changes angiotensinogen to angiotensin I , to angiotensin II and finally to aldosterone , which is issued from the adrenal cortex .
Anti Diuretic Hormone ( ADH ) Also known as vasopressin , controls urine concentration by increasing reabsorption of water in the distal tubule .
Renal Erythropoietin Factor This factor increases RBC production and explains why chronic kidney failure often leads to anemia .
Erythropoietin is produced in the proximal tubule cells , the same area where lead is known to accumulate in the kidney8 .
Pathology Pores of the normal glomerulus are about 0.01 µm , 100 times larger than those of capillaries in skeletal muscle .
The filtration of albumin , a negatively charged molecule , is more restricted than neutral dextran of equivalent size .
Loss of the fixed negative charge of the glomerular capillary wall results in enhanced filtration of anions .
With loss of charge discrimination in glomerulonephritis , the capillary wall becomes size-selective only .
Proteinuria is often the first indication that disease is present .
The classic intoxicator specific to the glomerulus is the immune complex .
From a peak of kidney function at about 20 years of age , the creatinine clearance decays ( because fewer nephrons are functional ) such that by 60 years of age about a quarter of kidneys are considered defective , and the organs would cease functioning entirely at age 140 .
The glomerulus is most vulnerable to immune complexes .
The Loop of Henle is specifically vulnerable to fluoride ions .
Tubule Pathology The tubule cells are subjected to high toxicant concentrations , even to possible crystallization .
Inducible by exposure to lead or heroin , as well as prolonged standing and strenuous exercise .
In shock , reduced blood flow to the kidney does not allow the high tubule metabolism to be sustained , and tubular cells go into apoptosis .
Normally , neighboring cells will stretch over the missing ones within a couple of hours , but with more apoptosis , serious lesions occur .
Reduced urine flow causes buildup of toxic wastes in the body , leading to death .
9-6 Reabsorption of glucose and amino acids can be impaired by Cd , Pb , Hg , leading to glycosuria and aminoaciduria .
Epithelial crescents ( arrow ) are found in a majority of the glomeruli in kidneys affected by rapidly progressing glomerulonephritis .
Scientific One major site of nephrotoxicity is the proximal convoluted tubule ( F9.2 ) , regardless of the nature of the toxicant .
Cells lining the tubules are irritated by toxicant concentration , and the formation of crystalline structures from marginally soluble toxicants , ( 2 ) detoxification and unmetabolized products are drawn into the cells of the proximal tubule along with water , and remain there while water moves on into the bloodstream , ( 3 ) de-conjugation biotransformation , e.g .
Its advantage over sulfanilamide is that it is not extensively metabolized in vivo , and exerts a prolonged action .
This problem can be avoided by drinking a lot of water to keep the solution diluted , so that precipitation does not occur .
There are also active secretory mechanisms located in the proximal tubule , one for organic bases and one for organic F9.5 In patients with sickle cell disease , who present with chronic renal disease and proteinuria , marked glomerular enlargement is present , often with mesangial expansion and segmental sclerosis .
There is abundant brown pigment , representing broken down hemoglobin , in surrounding tubules ( thin blue ovals ) , and interstitial fibrosis and vascular sclerosis .
As with any active process , carrier protein and enzymes are involved , energy is required , and these secretory pathways can be saturated .
Any damage to the proximal tubular cells by agents in the lumen can affect the active secretion process .
The mitochondria are particularly susceptible to damage , and one sees autophagy of damaged subcellular organelles and extrusion of denatured proteins , all possibly protective reactions .
Effects of chemical exposure on renal function can be very insidious and subtle , evading detection for a long time .
This is partly due to the redundant capacity in the kidney , where only about 25 % of nephrons are used at any one time .
An increased fluid load will bring additional nephrons into play , but after the '' crisis '' , the extra nephrons reduce their activity .
Considerable damage can occur in the kidney , with complete loss of many nephrons , before no reserve capacity remains .
By that time , the damage may not be reversible .
Cd The kidney is the most sensitive organ to cadmium .
About 5 % of the US population has enough exposure to cadmium to injure the kidneys .
The Cd-MT complex is stored in soft tissues of the body such as liver and kidney ( which contains 10 times more than the liver ) .
Metallothioneins are a surprisingly diverse group of molecules , but they are spread in a vast range to taxonomic groups , from prokaryotes and up .
The kidney is the main route of heavy metal excretion from the body , and most heavy metals are nephrotoxic .
At relatively low levels , a variety of signs and symptoms appear : glycosuria , aminoaciduria and polyuria , pointing to problems in efficient reabsorption in the proximal tubule .
At higher levels and at later stages in chronic exposure , elevated Blood Urea Nitrogen , renal necrosis , and anuria will precede death .
The histological picture is one of necrotic proximal tubules with the adjacent lumen filled with proteinaceous material .
When exposure to Cd exceeds the ability of tissues to synthesize MT and to store the Cd-MT complex , toxicity occurs above 300 µg Cd/g of cortical tissue .
The complex is excreted via glomerular filtration , but can be reabsorbed in the proximal tubule .
It was once thought that free Cd in tubular cells was the toxicant , but more recent evidence shows that the Cd-MT complex is toxic .
Progressively , low molecular weight proteinuria appears and cells concentrating Cd are lost , the Cd then evacuated in the urine .
Chronic intoxication produces irreversible renal failure .
of Cd from consumption of vegetables .
Smoking doubles the daily Cd dose .
It is characterized by deep muscle and bone pain of considerable severity , and bone deformation .
The proximal tubule is the target site .
Cadmium absorption in the gastrointestinal tract can be enhanced by dietary deficiency of calcium , iron , and protein .
Being older , and having had a number of children , these women would have been calcium deficient .
Dietary problems during the war would have insured an enhanced absorption of Cd .
The source of this Cd was paddy irrigation water taken from a river downstream from a metals mine , which allowed tailings and washings to run uncontrolled into the river for many years .
Pb Cd also produces brittleness as it replaces Ca in bones .
Only the proximal tubular effects can be reversed with chelation therapy .
Cadmium has worrisome estrogenic effects in cell culture .
Data from rats show that cadmium can act as an estrogen mimic in the whole animal , inducing conditions ranging from uterine hyperplasia to early onset of puberty5 .
Cd is important in electroplating and color pigments .
The greatest concentrations are found in the liver and kidneys of animals .
There has recently been concern in Sweden over body burdens 9-9 Chronic poisoning : proteinuria , glomerular and tubular damage .
Morphologically , one sees a selective necrosis in the pars recta region , loss of brush border , ( villi ) from cells , with the formation of clumps of membranes in the cellular cytoplasm , vacuoles , distinct mitochondrial changes characteristic of impending necrosis with eventual necrotic destruction .
EDTA Therapy Short term lead intoxication is usually reversible with EDTA ( ethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid ) therapy .
In the early 1950s several deaths occurred from kidney toxicity after EDTA treatment .
At that time , the dosage used was around 10 grams of EDTA per infusion , while it is now 3 grams .
EDTA kidney toxicity is related to the dose and the rate of infusion , which must be adjusted so that the infusion will not harm the kidney .
If the patient is very elderly , has low parathyroid activity or is suffering from heavy metal toxicity , treatment should be modified to use less EDTA less frequently ( once per week ) .
Tests of renal function should be performed before chelation therapy is started .
In cases of renal impairment , lower EDTA dosage is indicated , with sufficient periods of rest between the infusions .
Long term exposure to lead may cause irreversible kidney dysfunction .
Cr Chromium produces proximal tubular damage with glucosuria , but lower down than does Hg .
Ischemic patches on the kidney surface are suggestive of a vascular effect .
Ethylene Glycol Ethylene glycol ( car anti-freeze ) is biotransformed both in the liver and in the kidneys to oxalic acid , but the kidney is particularly susceptible .
Oxalic acid crystallizes in the lumen and in the cells of the tubule into calcium oxalate salt , leading to laceration of the tubules .
Leaves of rhubarb contain large amounts of oxalate .
The final product , glyoxylic acid , can be converted either into formic acid or oxalic acid .
Oxalic acid may react with calcium ions to produce insoluble crystals of calcium oxalate which precipitate in the renal tubules , eventually producing kidney `` stones '' and tubular epithelial necrosis with lipid inclusions .
Also visible , microscopically , is a thickening of the basement membrane in the glomerulus along with granular deposits .
Hg Mercury is a classical nephrotoxin , used in experimental models of kidney failure .
The damage is primarily in the pars recta of the proximal tubule , with proliferation of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum ( SER ) and extrusion of SER `` packets '' .
The basic toxic action of Hg is inhibition of the free sulphydryl groups ( -SH ) of enzymes .
100 deaths occurred in 1937 when ethylene glycol was used as a solvent for an oral sulphanilamide pharmaceutical preparation .
Within two days of consumption , nausea , vomiting , intestinal cramps , diarrhea , and back pain in the region of the kidneys were experienced .
These initial symptoms led to progressive hepatic Acute poisoning : brief polyuria may be followed by anuria .
Substitution of ethylene glycol by propylene glycol avoids all renal toxicity .
Lavage and activated charcoal can be used in the upper digestive tract to minimize absorption .
The principal goal in such poisoning is to correct the acidosis ( administration of bicarbonate ) , eliminate the unmetabolized ethylene glycol ( by hemodialysis ) , and to block further tissue biotransformation by administering ethanol ( 20 % ) which will compete successfully for the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase to block the formation of glycoaldehyde .
The ethanol should be administered within 8 hr of exposure in acute cases ( ingestion ) and be continued for at least 5 days .
Ability to concentrate urine is often the last property to be regained by the kidney after recovery from intoxication .
Organic Solvents Carbon tetrachloride and chloroform act predominantly in the proximal tubule .
Carbon tetrachloride causes severe hepatic necrosis , but the cause of death is kidney failure .
Renal tubular disease can be caused by a variety of volatile organic solvents , most likely as a consequence of reabsorption into the proximal tubule and biotransformation there into reactive and toxic intermediates .
Glomerular damage can also be produced by such agents , a slow progressive disease with an insidious onset seen in adults2,3 .
Elevated levels in the serum are indicative of kidney dysfunction , specifically low Glomerular Filtration Rate .
The basic test of kidney function is clearance .
Clearance can be higher or lower than the glomerular filtration rate if a substance is actively secreted or reabsorbed , and is routinely assessed by physicians to predict the rate of drug elimination in patients .
The relation between the most frequently used medical kidney parameters and the glomerular filtration rate .
The rate at which a drug is eliminated by the kidneys is commonly proportional to the clearance of creatinine .
Nomogram for rapid estimation of endogenous creatinine clearance .
Keep straightedge at crossing point of line marked `` R. '' Then move the righthand side of the straightedge to the appropriate serum creatinine value and read the patient's clearance from the left side of the nomogram .
This sugar dissolves in the blood , but is not bound to any plasma component , is not metabolized or stored , is not reabsorbed or secreted .
But in the presence of shock , severe cardiac failure , or oliguria , the estimate is too high .
Any significant renal disease or toxicity will affect the GFR , as will hypotension or shock .
Tubular Secretion Rate To evaluate the volume of plasma being passed through the kidneys as a whole , one can use , in the same way , PAH clearance .
P-Amino-Hippuric Acid is so well secreted into the urine by the tubules that about 91 % of it is eliminated from the whole plasma present in the kidney in a single pass .
This system should provide improved control of blood ions , particularly potassium , in dialysis patients .
In Vitro Initial research on the efficacy and toxicity of drugs is often conducted on cell lines that have been transformed , so that they may proliferate indefinitely , insuring repeatability of the test .
Most of the current cell models can not be used universally .
Two problems are loss of renal characteristics and limited lifespan .
Artificial kidneys Dialysis machines remove toxins from the blood through diffusion , but are not specific and do not produce hormones and enzymes .
In the future , a chamber could be used to grow kidney cells from pigs , and a patient 's blood made to interface with the Renal continuous cell lines such as Human Embryonic Kidney 293 cells ( HEK293 ) have been popular in pharmacology screening .
The suitability of HEK293 as an in vitro model for kidney cell function was in question .
When HEK293 was compared to Human Renal Cortical Epithelial Cells and Human Renal Epithelial Cells of more recent fabrication in their response to a drug , Camptothecin , responses were very different .
This probably led in the past to the use of lower and probably ineffective concentrations of drugs being used in tests of efficacy and toxicity .
9-13 In the MSDSs , many of the ingredients listed did not add up to 100 % , others were not specific as to their identity , and others indicated only as solid acrylic , proprietary alcohol , bodying agent .
Many of these chemicals are taken into the body not only via inhalation but through the intact skin .
Many of them are eliminated in the urine , contacting kidneys and bladder cells .
James was 47 years old when he noticed blood in his urine .
Test showed cancer of his right kidney , and it was removed in 1982 .
He stopping smoked cigarettes at the time his kidney cancer was diagnosed .
Lead is concentrated in the bones and excreted by the kidneys .
Kidney cells are damaged , resulting in decreased ability to eliminate fluid and solute loads .
While lead is stored in the bones , it interferes with the body 's ability to make blood cells , producing anemia .
Albert was admitted to the hospital because of kidney failure and hypertension when he was 58 years old .
He had been admitted twice before because of lead poisoning , and within the previous month because of severe anemia .
Six days later he was dead , his final diagnosis being chronic glomerulonephritis and uremia .
Short Kidney Cases Modified from Sherman .
An Intravenous Pyelogram showed no abnormalities of his kidneys or bladder .
His patrol car and an electrical transformer exploded and burned .
He was heavily exposed to the fumes and smoke .
In January 1985 he had bladder cancer at 39 years old , and underwent surgical removal of the malignancy .
Bladder cancer is rare at 39 years , and police duty does not involve exposure to toxic chemicals .
This sort of documentation is rare , in that few people have a body system evaluated twice within such a short time , with the appearance of cancer during the interval .
He did aluminum welding , and then silver brazing for the next 16 years , followed by electric welding for the last 2 years .
Inhalation of dusts or fumes of cadmium affects the respiratory tract and may affect the kidneys .
Cadmium is listed by the National Toxicology Program as anticipated to be a carcinogen .
Studies indicate that there is an increased incidence of prostatic cancer , and possibly kidney and respiratory cancer in cadmium workers . '' .
A routine examination found protein in his urine and kidney dysfunction .
As an incidental finding , he had reported that he had essentially lost his sense of smell ten years previously .
He used a dry buffing compound and said that although it was extremely dusty work , he did not wear any sort of mask until after 1978 .
He said the bumpers were plated in an area about 100 m away from his workstation , and that the fumes and the acids “ cut his wind ” , especially when equipment broke down .
Exposure to chromium is associated with lung disease and kidney damage .
Chromium compounds are taken into the body via inhalation , by ingestion with the saliva , and through the skin , causing damage at a number of sites .
Chromium is excreted in the urine , and causes damage as it passes through the kidneys .
He first learned of high blood pressure and diabetes in 1967 , and he took medication for each .
His blood pressure readings are 250/130 on the right , and 240/142 on the left , and he has significant protein in his urine .
The hospital also reported that a fellow employee of the patient had become ill at about the same time and had been admitted to another hospital .
A visit to the plant where both employees worked was organized .
The concern was that other workers might have been exposed as well .
It was learned at the plant that the two ill employees had worked at cleaning a room on the preceding day .
There had been a clogged floor drain in this room , and the workers used a drain cleaner that was one of the commercial products manufactured by the company .
Once in the drain , the cleaner had bubbled and given off a gas with a pungent odor .
Even though the employees developed headaches , they continued at their work for about four hours .
At home that night , the employees had become ill .
The other went to another emergency room ; his urine was sampled and it was bloody looking ; he was admitted to the hospital .
The first worker became 9-15 progressively worse and was admitted to a hospital the next day .
In the meantime it was determined in the hospitals that both workers had severe hemolysis , which caused the bloody-looking urine .
The only gas that will cause hemolysis is arsine .
One of the necessary ingredients for the production of arsine is arsenic .
The plant was therefore inspected for potential sources of arsenic , and samples from the floor drain were collected and analyzed .
All the samples were analyzed by neutron activation analysis , which is somewhat expensive but is a relatively easy way to analyze multiple matrices .
In addition , urine and blood from the two patients , the drain cleaner , and air samples were also submitted for analysis .
The plant consisted of a large work area and several offices .
There were two loading docks , one small and the other large .
One room was used for mixing the different products made there .
In another area workers bagged products .
The stopped-up floor drain from which the gases had bubbled was in the center of this area .
The loading dock outside this room was higher than the floor of the room ; when it rained , water on the loading dock would run into the building .
The manager of the plant had worked there for only a few years and was unaware of any arsenic ever having been used in the plant .
However , one of the maintenance men told investigators that before its present operation , the company had made arsenical herbicides , primarily arsenic trioxide ; in fact , a tank located outside on the loading dock had previously been used for mixing arsenical herbicides .
When the employees were conducting their general cleanup , they thought only water was in this tank and had drained it ; the contents drained into the stopped-up drain .
Clearly the water and arsenic trioxide from the forgotten mixing tank had reacted to produce the gas arsine , as follows : 6 NaOH + 6 Al + 6 H20 + As2O3 > urine than some of their fellow workers who had been in the vicinity of the drain but who had not gotten sick .
A supervisor , who had never gone into the area where the drain was , showed no arsenic in his urine .
It was concluded that the presence of arsenic in the drain resulted in the formation of arsine when the drain cleaner was added .
The arsine gas caused the hemolysis in the patients .
The two patients , after a very stormy medical course including renal failure and other problems , finally recovered , partly because such cases can now be treated with dialysis units .
Before dialysis units were available patients with severe arsine poisoning usually died of renal failure .
There are two effects of arsine poisoning on the kidneys .
One is the breakdown of the red blood cells with excretion of hemoglobin , which will damage the kidneys ; in addition , arsine itself may directly damage the kidneys .
Both employees had to be dialyzed for several weeks .
Arsenic and Antimony Levels in Environmental Samples Gathered at the Chemical Plant Where Arsine Poisoning Occurred Concentration ( ppm ) Arsenic Antimony Source Drain Upper fraction Liquid Solid Lower fraction Liquid Solid Air sample Abandoned herbicide tank With agitation Before After 6 NaAlO2 + 3 H2O + 2 AsH3 Arsine is extremely toxic .
Arsine poisoning does not reveal itself in elevated arsenic levels in those patients who have been poisoned by arsine ; it does not produce the same type of symptomatology as arsenic poisoning .
Indeed , arsenic poisoning is entirely different from arsine poisoning .
The most important consideration was to demonstrate that arsenic was present in the drain , that an arsenic-to-arsine reaction could have taken place , and that there was arsine in the gas the employees had inhaled .
Drain samples from the herbicide tank , samples from the drain cleaner , and the aluminum chips were all tested for arsenic .
As shown in the Table , there was a great deal of arsenic , comparatively speaking , in the drain and in the herbicide tank .
If antimony were substituted for arsenic in the reaction shown above , the result would be formation of stibene .
However , stibene is not as stable as arsine , and it is highly unlikely that it would have caused the illness in the patients .
The drain cleaner and the aluminum chips had no arsenic .
Bangladesh and Arsenic ( National Geographic , 2002 ) Because surface water had bacterial contamination , 12 million wells were dug in Bangladesh to minimize infection in the water supply .
Finally , renal diseases and cancers of lungs and bladder appear .
It appears that arsenic attached to sedimentary grains is released in deep groundwater in great part by bacteria4 .
More than 10 micrograms per liter of the poisonous element were associated with an elevated risk of all-cause mortality6,7 .
The Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) signaled on October 31 , 2001 that it will be reducing the amount of arsenic allowed in U.S. drinking water from a maximum of 50 micrograms per liter to the tighter 10 micrograms per liter .
The relationship between Itai-Itai disease among inhabitants of the Jinzu River basin and cadmium in rice .
Membranous nephropathy following exposure to volatile hydrocarbons .
Nephron Number in Patients with Primary Hypertension , Gunhild Keller et al .
Role of metal-reducing bacteria in arsenic release from Bengal delta sediments .
National Research Council of the National Academies , The National Academies Press .
Determining Test Doses for In Vitro Systems .
Minimum Essential Medium Elution and End Point Titration .
Advanced Applications of Cell Culture in Toxicology .
The Classic Models used by Biologists Formal Name Description 10 .
Escherichia coli Saccharomyces cerevisiae Schizosaccharomyces pombe Caenorhabditis elegans Drosophila melanogaster Danio rerio Arabidopsis thaliana Mus musculus Toxicity determinations are influenced by our choice of toxicity models , and by our choice of variables used to assess these models .
Selection of Experimental Technique To experimentally determine toxicity , a model as well as investigation methods must be chosen .
When general toxicity is the intended determination of the test , these choices , which by necessity use a specific models and investigation techniques , are powerful determinants of toxicity , essentially by possibly excluding other aspects of toxicity from consideration .
Intestinal bacterium Yeasts , single nucleated cells Small soil-dwelling worm Fruit fly Zebrafish Mustard plant family Mouse Drosophila rose to prominence in the early 1900s because of its short generation time and large chromosomes .
Although the fruit fly encodes about 14,000 proteins and humans almost twice that number , many proteins accomplish the same tasks in both organisms .
When human disease genes are put in flies , they often cause similar symptoms .
Addition of a human gene in a fly can compensate for the deletion of the same gene from the fly .
The zebra fish is also also an old environmental toxicology model for organ toxicity , developmental toxicity and acute toxicity ( LC50 ) .
You can see through zebra fish , so necrosis and changes in organ morphology can be seen under a dissecting microscope .
Choice of a test system Test systems are chosen to facilitate investigations , and make them as productive and economical as possible .
Intestinal bacteria , yeast and mice are familiar and accessible .
Neurotoxicity has been studied using staining antibodies .
It has been used to study fetal alcoohol syndrome and teratogenicity .
Model Problems It is difficult to determine that a model properly represents what it is intended to , and the foldback position is to use a traditional model that is heavily represented in the literature .
Funding agencies dominated by sceptical colleagues support work on a shortlist of favoured species , and as a consequence , research on life revolves around a handful of species , under the assumption that model organisms offer universal insights .
This undue focus comes with a much reduced field of view .
The use of frogs ( Xenopus laevis ) in pregnancy testsfor led to their recruitment as a model for developmental research .
Models used in toxicology include an even larger range of organisms than in biology , partly because many organ diseases must be represented : hematotoxicity , cardiotoxicity , gastrointestinal toxicity , hepatotoxicity , nephrotoxicity , ototoxicity , bladder toxicity , neurotoxicity , pulmonary toxicity , endocrine toxicity and reproductive toxicity .
Each of these organ systems is easiest to observe in specific models .
The digestive system is very similar in structure to worms .
The lack of developmental plasticity in Drosophila and of genetic variability in inbred rats limit what these models can tell us19 .
Although the mouse and human genome are about 85 % identical , the remaining 15 % difference can introduce substantial variations in toxicity reactions , because so many elements of livings systems are functionally bound together .
Rats replicate high blood pressure and atherosclerosis more readily than mice do .
Genetically , dogs are much closer to humans than rats .
Although the dog split off first from the common ancestor , the rat experienced a much higher mutation rate .
In the future , in vitro proteomics and genomics may become popular , as cellular or molecular endpoints appropriate for high throughput toxicity screening are developed .
In animal models , factors such as gender , age , nutritional and disease state , time of exposure , daily rhythms of cortisol and melatonin , and the general environment may all affect test results .
Researchers generally tend to gloss over the weakness of their models .
10-3 Thalidomide , a sedative drug tested with good results in the late 50s to treat morning sickness associated with pregnancy , unexpectedly produced amelia and phocomelia in humans .
Mice and rats are resistant to it ; hamsters and rabbits show variable effects .
The selection of the response variable is probably the most under-played aspect of toxicity testing .
Duration of the test Eye irritation may only take a few seconds to apply and as little as a day to interpret .
Reproductive and carcinogenicity tests take years .
The most basic classification of toxicity tests refers to duration ( acute vs chronic ) .
Model Cost The choice of test system strongly influences the price of the test .
Prices for relatively inexpensive biocompatibility tests are compiled in T10.2 , while prices ( $ ) for more ambitious studies in the rat are shown below .
Dosages to be tested To anticipate the appropriate dosages , something must be known about the toxicity of the agent tested .
The dosage is usually in mg/kg , as opposed to the more exact scaling according to Weight 0.66-0.75 .
Attempt is made to cover the dosage range with a reasonable number of groups that will include effective or lethal doses , as well as the threshold dose .
Reproducibility vs Representativity Within the test procedure specification lies a decision between the value of Reproducibility vs Representativity .
The more heavily controlled a test is in terms of the organism used , husbandry and environmental variables , the more restricted it is in the conditions that it represents .
In general , investigators are more concerned about Reproducibility of results than about Representativity because Reproducibility is easier to prove .
In view of the costs associated with experiments , it is often relevant to consider the minimum testing required , as opposed to what would ideally be needed .
Choice of a Response For example , it is easier to purchase rats with identical genetic makeup and control completely their food and environmental conditions than it is to insure that this particular test will properly represent human safety , which should involve a rich array of possible conditions ( age , sex , social , environmental , medical ) , all of which are costly to simulate .
The end-point of the study should be easily observable and quantifiable .
Our knowledge base and our illustrations of living systems tend to under-estimate true natural complexity .
As a consequence , experiments intended to be carefully controlled sometimes yield diffuse results .
For example , genetically identical mice raised as far as possible in the same environment show significant variability in life spans6 .
A common fear of experimenters is to end up with ambiguous data that is difficult or impossible to interpret .
Any `` realistic '' toxicological representation includes an array of conditions so complex that the smearing out effect on the data risks making the results unintelligible .
Therefore , such simulations are rarely attempted and are left for epidemiologists to extract from human populations .
The US Good Laboratory Practices provide guidelines for conducting nonclinical laboratory studies .
150 sq cm or 5 grams 120 sq cm or 4 grams It would require many independent experiments performed on a number of different species and under many different conditions to raise confidence in Representativity , which drives the costs much higher .
Therefore , toxicologists attempt to achieve Reproducibility in individual tests , and to attain Representativity by compiling a number of diverse experiments .
It should be realized that for many important biological variables , there is an inherent General Provisions Organization and Personnel Facilities Equipment Testing Facilities Operation Test and Control Articles Protocol and Conduct of a Non-Clinical Laboratory Study Records and Reports Disqualification of Testing Facilities Sections within each of these parts identify procedures to which laboratories must comply .
Ethics Using surrogates species for testing is based first on the principle that humans are more valuable than other species .
We wish to protect ourselves from injury even if it means injury to other species , because we have less in common with them than with other humans .
Standardization of Methods Over the past three decades , toxicological assessment protocols have evolved into complex tests of a variety of endpoints of toxicity .
Considering toxicity methods , one can wonder about the value of protocol diversity as opposed to protocol standardization .
Diversity leads to discoveries , while standardization leads to comparability .
The US FDA and other national and international bodies have led protocols to become highly formalized , and consequently expensive .
If all the research done in the past had been done according to Good Laboratory Practices ( F10.3 ) , this text might be written with a quill , rather than a computer… GLP keeps track of everything through reporting , even the trivial , absorbing precious resources .
GLP also leads to an effective monopoly on research for rich corporations or governments by disabling small laboratories , or at least taking funding away from them .
Contrasting study styles can influence conclusions .
For example , in assessing the bioeffects of bisphenol A , the US FDA relied mostly on industry GLP studies , while the US National Toxicology Program relied on studies performed by university scientists .
Genetic programs differ , but none is inherently more valuable than another .
The quest for knowledge is a second principle supporting testing .
Experimentation that leads to improved knowledge , whether done on animals or humans , will benefit countless other humans in the future .
> Criticism : We injure the few to save the mass , which is contrary to individual rights .
This happens to some extent in clinical trials .
But in the end , we go ahead with testing mostly because we have acquired through technology a position of power on our planet…a power that we should not abuse .
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development has also published “ Good Laboratory Practices ” but in this case specifying which toxicology tests should be run on any given chemical ( cosmetic , pesticide , solvent ) .
Note that in practice , this acts to restrict as much as it does to require testing .
Generally , this bureaucracy seriously increases the price of science .
If we could program computers with an accurate description of living systems useful for toxicity testing , we would have such knowledge that there would be no need to test in the first place .
Short of testing on humans , which is done in clinical trials , we use the most primitive and inexpensive surrogate that will do the job .
Ethics committees are active to insure that unnecessary pain is not inflicted on experimental animals .
This is due in great part to lack of human toxicological data .
The conclusion is that animal experiments are modestly predictive of human carcinogenicity , but that lack of adequate human data is an even more serious problem .
Present requirement for rodent and non-rodent might suggest the existence of two large categories of animals in toxicity responses , but there is no special similarity between rodents as opposed to non-rodents .
The requirement for non-rodents prevents undue concentration on rodents , just because they are inexpensive .
This is now abandoned in favor of fundamental studies : specific receptors , toxicokinetics , and metabolic studies with in vitro models .
Once the cause of the divergence is known , directed investigations are conducted in humans .
In practice , studies in a second species are most useful to stop the development of a drug , since a repeat problem implies a small chance that humans would be somehow be spared .
Lay people assessing scientific research often harbor misconceptions , particularly under-estimating the effort required to achieve discoveries .
The labs presented in popular films are lavishly equipped , with lots of redundant staff .
In Vivo Models Animals models are useful to unravel mechanisms of action and uncover potential effects , but are weak when attempting to predict impacts on humans .
The correspondence between carcinogenicity determinations in humans and animals can be evaluated using databases that list carcinogenicity to humans and animals for a given chemical .
10-7 The changes in use of various animal species for research and toxicology testing is affected by availability of research funds and ethical concerns ( T10.7 ) .
There has been a substantial move towards fish , which humans identify less with .
Many large corporations have their own closed rodent colonies , leading to some uncertainty as to whether all tests on `` rats '' , for example , are truly comparable .
In one view , chemicals should be tested in the same strain , age , and sex of animals , so that comparisons can be made .
Companies like ICI , Eastman It would be rational to investigate interspecies differences questions and interpret divergent findings before larger studies are performed , but for practical reasons , this is rarely done .
However , there are many other companies providing data for their products via contracted research establishments using '' white laboratory '' mice or rats of various origins .
Historic Evolution of animal species required for toxicity testing .
Changes in species used in toxicity testing .
The reproducibility of results from the single animal type is then lost .
This usually indicates that two or more experimentally determined values using different strains of either mice or rats were conducted , making it more difficult to define toxicity precisely , but easier to appreciate its range .
The LD50 reported typically have no notation concerning strain , age , and sex of the species used .
Tubular hypertrophy and regeneration is specific to alpha 2uglobulin and is not relevant to humans .
Rat tests can be irrelevant to human health .
Modified from Casarett & Doull In the pharmaceutical industry , drug-target validation and preclinical drug development are performed almost exclusively using inbred mice and rats .
This affords substantial savings by increasing data reproducibility because of the small genetic heterogeneity of the animals .
However , these savings may be offset by failed clinical trials , sometimes reflecting the inadequacy of inbred animals to model genetic variations in humans .
The solution could include using mouse strains closely related to wild mice and , in the future , comparative genomics of the drug targets in humans and mice .
Positive Response for Carcinogenicity in Rats and Mice for Selected Target Sites .
The choice of animal model can be critical : there is only 70 % correlation in general carcinogenicity between rat and mouse .
By target site , the situation is even 10-11 SPECIFICITY Rats show decreased thyroid hormone half-life , increased thyroid stimulating hormone level .
Humans have thyroidbinding protein , and so develop no tumors .
Observation implies that differences between species are mostly quantitatively based on toxicokinetics in uptake , distribution , metabolism and clearance , rather than on fundamental differences .
point mutations on the mouse genome .
Sex Bias Sex biases are based on practical concerns .
They are preferred in dermatology because they fight less , simplifying skin observations ( wounds and scars ) .
In some cases , mouse models do not sustain close scrutiny .
However , it has recently been found that rasassociated cancers are triggered by different pathways in mice and humans , rendering two decades of work useless5 .
Concentrating on one sex can be viewed as an advantage because it builds a larger database on a single target .
A stronger bias than the sex bias is the bias against children .
It is not seen as ethical to experiment on them .
So children are viewed as small adults , although their metabolism is different .
Specific animal models can be examined using genetic techniques to reveal the molecular details of , for example , cancer .
Investigating them in detail will take considerable time .
Mouse Strains 90 % of research mammals are mice , because of their small size , quick breeding and easily discernible variations .
By the 1950s , the mapping of genes in mice had developed , and the nuclear era brought fine structure mapping of the genome because of the systematic observation of large deletions and translocations .
Standardized Rats 20 or more generations of brother-sister matings among rats leads to low phenotypic variance with more consistent experimental results .
Genetic drift causes body weights to increase and survival rates to decline in rat colonies .
Inbred rats are better in experiments aimed at clarifying mechanistic principles .
Outbred rats present a genetic variability similar to human populations , but larger numbers are then required for statistically appropriate data .
Each colony is resampled and monitored annually to verify genetic consistency .
Mating of closely related animals is minimized by a rotational breeding system .
Each of the 4 breeding colonies in the world are restarted every 5 years from the original source colony or from cryo-preserved embryos .
The genetics of the rat or mouse itself is not the only concern .
The large intestine of mammals is populated with hundreds of types of bacteria .
Bacterial diversity increases from carnivory to omnivory to herbivory .
Conventional wisdom is that they help the organism absorb nutrients that would otherwise be indigestible , manufacture vitamins , kill germs , neutralize bacterial toxins and modulate the immune system .
By contrast , farmers have known for a long time that some amount of antibiotics in the feed improves weight gain by limiting bacterial biomass .
But bacteria may have more complex interactions with the body by turning on specific intestinal genes , promoting the growth of blood vessels in the gut and triggering production of chemicals that control bacterial populations .
However , these rodents must consume 30 % more calories to maintain normal body weight , and are unusually susceptible to infections .
They also have a poorly formed intestinal network of capillaries .
The need for some bacterial flora , which is difficult to control , renders the goal of a monotypical test animal even more difficult to reach and maintain .
mutated by gene insertion or inactivation to more closely resemble human models .
This has been achieved for human diseases such as colorectal cancer and sickle cell anemia .
Transgenic Mice Transgenic mice may improve accuracy and efficacy because they respond to carcinogens more quickly than conventional rodent strains , and they may provide more mechanistic information .
These animals have specific genes added to their normal genome by microinjecting DNA into the pro-nuclei of one-celled embryos .
After exposure to chemicals in the animal , the added gene can be extracted from the DNA of various tissues of the animal ( retrievable mutation shuttle vectors ) and tested for integrity ( absence or presence of mutation ) .
Stratagene introduced the Big Blue Transgenic Mouse to assess mutagenic potential of test compounds .
The assay is an alternative to tests such as the two-year animal bioassay proscribed by the National Toxicology Program ( NTP ) .
The NTP bioassay involves the dosing of a large number of animals with an endpoint of tumor formation .
In contrast , the endpoint in the Big Blue assay is mutation of a test gene , and it only takes three to four months .
Integrated into the chromosomes of the Big Blue mice is a retrievable lambda phage shuttle vector containing the bacterial lacI gene .
The lacI gene serves as a reporter gene for mutation that can be retrieved from any organ of the animal to assess mutation frequency in that tissue .
Genetically Modified Animals Over three decades , the conventional rodent bioassay has been the standard for identifying carcinogens .
But mice can be After a few weeks of exposure to different doses of the test compound , the transgene is shuttled into bacteria , where 10-13 mutations in lacI can result in a blue plaque phenotype when plated on bacterial lawns .
The effect of loss of p53 genes on mouse survival .
Knockout Animals Knockout animals ( we now have over 1000 knockout rodents available ) are transgenic animals in which specific genes have been disabled in order to assess separately the impact of their removal .
Almost all genetic models are designed to detect cancer or mutations .
It is believed that the p53+/- mouse would be more sensitive to genotoxic agents .
Creating and marketing genetically controlled rats : Wistar Hannover GALAS rat .
A typical transgenic model is the Tg.AC mouse , which carries the v-Ha-ras transgene , one of a class of oncogenes that plays a key role in cell proliferation in the early stages of tumor induction .
These models will probably seem naive in a few decades , because the methods probably underestimate the complexity of toxicity processes .
The problem is that genetic systems are themselves complicated , and that toxic reactions are difficult to predict purely from genetic knowledge .
These new techniques adds to the richness , but also to the complexity of the dataset .
manipulated mice may contribute the most knowledge in relation to their own mutation .
Wild type lacI gene will produce a clear bacteriophage plaque , while those that have sustained a mutation in the lacI gene will produce a blue plaque .
Wild type lacZ will produce blue plaques and lacZ mutant clear plaques .
The cIl protein induces the integration of the lambda DNA into the bacterial genome , and this results in lysis .
A mutation in the cIl gene results in growth of lambda particles and lysis of the cell .
gpt gene is sensitive to point mutations .
rad and gam are sensitive to deletion mutation .
This results in excision of the plasmid from the bacteriophage DNA , and creation of a plasmid .
Plating on plates with 6- TG selects for mutants in the gpt gene .
GENETIC CHANGE APPLICATIONS deficient in p53 v-Ha-ras fused to fetal zeta globin promoter Expresses ornithine decarboxylase Tumor biology , potential carcinogens Initiated skin for non-genotoxic carcinogens Low-dose chemical risks C-Hras with promoter Mdr1a Disrupted Mdrla Mdrla/b Disrupted Mdrla/b pim-l TSGp53/BigBlue Xpc More pim-l oncogenes lacI , p53 knockout heterozygous Xpc knockout Rapid onset , higher incidence of tumors ( agiosarcomas , lung adenocarcinomas ) Blood-brain barrier deficiency Penetration of drugs in brain , testis , ovaries , adrenal glands Lymphomas by chemicals Screening of mutagens and tumorigens Skin carcinoma after UV an irresistible draw , and the pharmaceutical industry is gearing up to use bioinformatics to find drug targets ( F10.16 ) .
Using BioInformatics to find Drug Targets .
People directing the human genome project foresee that 100 years will be needed to take advantage of the information gathered .
Genetically modified animals are still restricted from the point of view of general toxicology .
supF mutants do not suppress amber mutations in the lacZ gene in the host cell .
Recover plasmid from animal cells by electroporation .
Plasmid with a mutated rpsL gene will result in colony formation on streptomycin plates .
Rodent Each type of animal study prepares the next level , to insure that large sums are not invested in studies using the wrong doses , for example .
Some important aspects of animal testing have been very poorly controlled until now .
In an effort to minimize test costs , mouse chow has traditionally been obtained from low cost sources ( Purina LRD5001 ) .
Since these foods also contain cadmium , chromium , copper , lead and zinc , the unfortunate toxicologist looking for low-level effects will be completely and unwittingly blinded : how can he detect the effect of 10 ppb of arsenic if the animals are subjected to a change from 400 to 410 ppb ?
Acute studies administer single , large doses of an agent to an animal .
The route of entry should be as representative of likely human exposure as possible .
Acute skin irritation studies are often performed in rabbits for 4 hours of contact on a shaved back .
Acute inhalation studies are often also performed over 4 hours .
The effects are often dramatic , but frequently , the jumble of signs and symptoms are not useful in determining mechanisms of action or of assistance in determining possible therapies .
Acute toxicity experiments can be a frightening experience , with effects ranging from death to severe , transient incapacity and illness to very mild signs and symptoms .
There are situations where an acute , high level , exposure might result in the delayed appearance of some form of toxicity ( hepatic or renal function , neurotoxicity , etc ) .
Given the diversity of responses to chemicals , what endpoint would be common to all ?
Death is the only clear choice .
This determines the risk to human handlers of the chemical and allows comparison of the potency of one chemical with that of another ( T1.9 ) .
Physicians need to know the LD50 as they cope with symptoms in a patient .
LD50 ( median lethal dose ) for acute oral toxicity is the statistically derived single dose of a substance that can be expected to cause death within 14 days in 50 per cent of young adult albino rats when administered by the oral route .
Identification of target organs and clinical manifestations .
Establish the reversibility of toxic responses .
10-16 The safe handling of chemicals in an industrial setting depends on adequate information on lethal dosages , as does transport of such agents and even environmental exposures .
We have all seen media reports showing derailments of tank cars containing chemicals that threaten ( real or imaginary ) the safety of a community .
LD50 is also essential to police and firefighters engaged in controlling accidents , in patrolling or cleaning up a contaminated area or in combating industrial fires .
Up & Down In the Up and Down Procedure , one animal is orally given an appropriate dose ( 175 mg/kg is the default starting dose ) and observed for up to 14 days .
Dosing stops when one of three stopping criteria is satisfied , with as few as six , but not more than 15 animals used per test .
This is hardly a new concept , an extensive study published in 1948 showing that most values obtained in this manner were within 30 % of the LD50 obtained by the more classical study approach .
Is this sufficiently accurate for most purposes ?
Limit Test The limit test is used to determine if the toxicity of a test substance is above or below a specified dose .
Five to ten animals of each sex or 10 animals of the susceptible sex are administered a dose specified by regulations .
Based on the results , a regulatory action or additional testing may be required .
More precision on the LD50 value and a more solid knowledge of the morbidity associated with the agent ( because of the increased number of `` cases '' observed ) .
Those surviving at high dosage are more valuable than those dying , since it gives the investigator the opportunity to record : 10.2.8.2 .
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD ) Test Guideline 401 ( 1987 ) Acute oral toxicity is estimated with three dose groups of five rats of one sex , with confirmation in the other sex using one group of five rats .
This reduced the minimum number of animals used for acute oral toxicity to about 20 .
Subchronic Tests The goals are : The exposure is always via the route by which the human might acquire the agent .
The investigator hopes to obtain a graduation in effect with dose .
The highest level of exposure must produce overt toxicity , without altering normal physiology unduly .
If sub-chronic tests have already been performed , perhaps the Maximum Tolerated Dose is already known .
Workers are typically exposed to potential toxicants repeatedly , at levels far below those of acute toxicity .
Is there any cumulative effect from repeated exposure ?
In acute toxicity , there is rarely opportunity to determine mechanisms of action , since the observed effects arise from a general overwhelming of the animals ' body systems .
General failure is not the ideal situation to identify mechanisms .
Logically , at lower dosages , one should be able to correlate more moderate signs and symptoms of toxicity with particular target organs .
What endpoints of toxicity should be examined in sub-chronic studies ?
Although one target may dominate your observations , you should cover multiple organs and rely on a broad range of toxic endpoints .
The biomarkers used by the toxicologist range from simple parameters as growth and development ( sensitive yardsticks of general wellbeing in small animals ) through hematological and biochemical measurements , to microscopic examination of tissue morphology at termination of the animals ' lives .
Gross and microscopic condition of all ±12 major organs of all animals .
a high level might show the adverse effect more rapidly than a low level .
Little will be seen in MSDS sheets ( T1.24 ) on the subchronic and chronic toxicity of many chemicals , because such studies have not been conducted .
From such a study , a NOAEL may be obtained leading with the proper safety factors to establishment of the Reference Dose which may establish regulatory limits ( EPA ) of human exposure .
Larger lab animals are fed at meals , while rodents are commonly fed ad libitum ( constant access to food in unlimited quantity ) which gives them higher blood fat , higher , cholesterol , and greater incidence of heart damage and cancer , a diabetic-type model , compared to the meal-fed rodents , which have enhanced insulin sensitivity18 .
Meal-feeding is “ an important synchronizer of many behaviors and biological rhythms , ” and appears to alter the expression of genes that code for proteins involved in the rate and amplitude of biotransformation .
Seemingly straightforward biological markers can prove misleading .
Some drugs developed to fight osteoporosis increased bone density , but also increased the risk of fractures .
Former heart drugs encainide , flecainide and morcizine normalize irregular heartbeats , and were once prescribed to hundreds of thousands of patients .
Long-term trials later proved that death rates for drug users were 2.5 higher than for controls .
It is very difficult to tie specific biomarkers firmly to clinical outcomes .
The public and the workforce are concerned with effects of long-term low level exposures to toxicants in food , air and water .
Chronic toxicity studies conducted in rodents are nothing other than extensions of the subchronic studies .
The same endpoints of toxicity are monitored in chronic studies as in subchronic studies , but there are specific aims to such studies : The reversibility of the observed toxicity is an important aspect frequently overlooked in both animal and human studies .
Patients and physicians want to know how long this illness will last , e.g .
Animal studies are designed so that , at the end of the treatment period , sufficient animals remain to be allocated to a recovery study , to see whether the effects of the toxicant are completely reversible , partially so , or irreversible .
While this is useful information to obtain , few toxicological studies provide this type of information .
administer the toxicant for a major portion of the lifespan of the animals , demonstrate a dose-effect relationship , provide data that can be used to extrapolate safe humans doses .
The exorbitant costs associated with prolonged studies has led industry to press the regulatory agencies to reduce the duration , first to 12 months and , more recently , to 6 months for rodents .
The case is made that , by adjusting dosages upward , one can attain , in 6 to 12 months , the levels of exposure encountered in 24 months , and that toxicity produced in the 6-month study is the same as that found in a much longer study .
You can certainly spot the weakness in such an argument : excessively high dosages , problems in the normal biotransformation and elimination of the high levels of the toxicant and any reactive intermediates , the young age of the animals ( when most chemical-related toxicity appears in mature humans ) , etc .
However , the regulatory agencies have accepted the shorter studies .
In spite of this , one still sees classic two-year studies in the literature .
As with the subchronic studies , the dose-effect relationship should be developed by proper selection of doses .
Furthermore , euthanizing representative subgroups of animals at selected time intervals throughout the treatment period will help in documenting the initial stages and the development of the toxic lesion .
This allows in depth exploration of possible mechanisms of action .
As in the subchronic study , sufficient animals should remain at the end of the treatment period in order to study the recovery from the toxic insult , to answer questions about the reversibility or permanence of the lesion .
The NOAEL ( No Observable Adverse Effect Level ) and the NOEL ( No Observable Effect Level ) are desirable endpoints of chronic studies .
Few MSDSs contain information about chronic toxicity .
In most cases , any evidence of chronic toxicity has been obtained from epidemiological studies of occupationally-exposed individuals .
Relating specific endpoints of toxicity to many years of estimated exposures often involving a mix of agents is difficult .
Variables measured in subchronic and chronic studies to assess the general health of the test animals and to monitor the appearance of adverse health effects .
Carcinogenicity Tests Cancer-causing agents are usually effective only after prolonged exposure .
Since 24-months of exposure is necessary to allow the development of some tumors in rats , shortening chronic studies to 6 months would likely miss the carcinogenic potential of a chemical .
Those animals on the higher dosages will be terminated at the 6-month time interval ( except those for the recovery study ) , while those at the lower dosages will be continued for the required 24-month period , examined only for tumor incidence ( site , number , benign or malignant ) .
It is possible , though unlikely , that tumors might be seen in some of the `` chronic toxicity '' animals exposed to higher levels of the toxicant .
Dose-effect relation based on a 3-level exposure chronic study , with approximate derivation of the No Observed Effect and No Observed Adverse Effect Levels .
This means that the chemical industry ( pharmaceuticals , pesticides , solvents ) is committed to providing study data on the carcinogenicity of their agent and to bear the cost of such studies .
Since carcinogenesis may occur at much lower levels of exposure than those required to demonstrate other types of chronic toxicity , such studies typically use low levels of exposure ( F10.20 ) .
Given the large costs involved , the carcinogenicity study and chronic toxicity study are often incorporated F10.20 .
To get permission for Phase I clinical studies , the company reports all about the preclinical stage , and describes the Phase I plan in detail .
Human Tests Epidemiology uses existing human exposures to assess health impacts .
Also , epidemiology can not provide data on chemicals not yet introduced , since there is no human exposure .
To get data on new drug candidates , for example , some humans must be exposed at some point .
A company can make a new drug , and test it in test tubes and animals without telling anyone .
Test-tube and animal tests are preclinical : they come before testing the new drug in humans .
Since the company 's aim is to someday sell the drug for use in humans , it designs preclinical tests ( in vitro and in animals ) to get permission for the next testing stages .
Doses are carefully increased , and the effects measured , to establish the Maximum Safe Human Dose .
Clinical trials can often be confounded by placebo effects , an ill-understood phenomenon that is only beginning to be investigated .
Keeping number of subjects small avoids unnecessary risks .
If the drug is known to be toxic ( AIDS and cancer drugs often are ) , patients with the disease are substituted for healthy volunteers .
Over 90 % of drug candidates effective in test tubes fail in animal studies .
The drug does not act as intended , or is poisonous .
Only 1 % of the drugs that start the tests progress to the clinical stage .
For those that do , the process took about three years .
Some have suggested that Phase III trials should be replaced faster alternatives and post-market surveillance , and that current output of new drugs could be doubled by such a measure .
After Phase II , patients and insurers would rate effectiveness , and drugs could then be handled based on that feedback .
Though companies would still be liable for unforeseen side effects , patients and doctors would be warned that the drug was approved based on provisional research .
These costs can be lowered by improved screening .
After approval , the drug is monitored by the pharmaceutical company itself for side effects that can only be discovered by use in many more thousands of humans .
The result should be an authoritative confirmation of drug effectiveness .
But a number of drugs were taken off the market after their initial approval : Vioxx , Seldane , Rezulin and Baycol are examples .
Some risks do not become evident before the drug has been used on millions of people , essentially because we do not know ahead of time what to look for .
200 patients with the targeted disease are tested , looking for proper therapeutic range , dosing regimen , appropriate end points of treatment and documenting drug efficacy .
The claim was found to be true , but Avandia was kept on the market , because of its efficacy , but with a strict warning label .
Developing this information requires testing on 1000 patients , to assess and detect rare complications and find specific practical recommendations in drug administration .
Requirements for this phase are especially demanding .
Separate , independent tests must show the drug to be safe and effective .
It then takes about two years for approval .
50 % of failures It may be impossible to have all the information about the benefit-risk ratio of a drug at the end of the premarket phase , as clinical trials include only 500 to 3,000 patients .
So the full 10-23 range of a medication ’ s side effects is not likely to be revealed until it is used by the general population , which includes people with co-morbidities , pregnant women , and senior citizens .
Drugs are approved based on incomplete information and inevitably , problems will emerge .
response ) , and results may be selectively ignored to prop up drug development success .
For a variety of practical reasons , an animal model may assess a chemical very differently than a clinical human model , leading to basic incoherences .
Conflict of interest The drug company , which tests and monitors its own drugs , could aggressively disseminate data on the drug ’ s effectiveness and closely guard information about its hazards .
When hazards emerge progressively from data , it is tempting to imagine that early warning signs are statistical aberrations .
Panel members from government bodies such as the National Institutes of Health often have strong financial relationships with pharmaceutical companies , casting some doubt on their impartiality .
New drugs , most profitable to drug companies , end up being over-prescribed compared to older drugs that are as effective .
Also , the risks of old drugs are usually better known than the risks of new drugs .
Use of human subjects Is it feasible to fairly explain the potential risks to a patient in a clinical trial , when the purpose of the trial is to learn about these risks in the first place ?
Breath of testing How do you balance the need to test a drug comprehensively with the need to make it available as quickly as possible ?
Testing can be two of the following words , at the expense of the third .
Performance of Testing -William C. Weldon , Chairman of Johnson & Johnson Since 1992 in the US , pharmaceutical companies pay the FDA to defray the cost of reviewing drug applications , and this extra money cut the approval time from 27 to 15 months , perhaps bringing in more industry influence within the FDA .
The poorer performance may be due to time compression , or it may indicate poor preparatory work .
Statistical methods of analysis may be incorrect , the test methodology may not be appropriate ( choice of test system and 10.4 .
In Vitro Models In vitro cytotoxicity and cell viability assays predict toxicity based on cell number , morphology , and metabolic activity .
In vitro testing is appropriate because of strategic reductionism , cutting the complexity of living systems approximately in two : there is an much complexity from the cell to the complete organism as there is from the cell to molecules .
In vitro methods are favored for ethical and economic reasons , and can provide better accuracy , sensitivity and resolution than in vivo methods .
It is however difficult to conduct in vitro tests under conditions that represent completely in vivo conditions .
Obtaining Cell Suspensions To easily manipulate cells , it is desirable to obtain them as a suspensions , as opposed to bulk tissue .
After digestion of the extracellular medium , mild mechanical manipulation of the cells will yield suspensions .
The extraction of the cells has undesirable consequences .
Cellular messengers such as cytokines also influence cell behavior in vivo .
As normal cells are extracted from an animal and placed in culture , they may lose some of their original characteristics in a matter of days , as they react to extraction from their original environment .
The experimenter must reassure himself that the characteristics critical to his toxicological investigation are retained in the model .
tests do not provide the range of physiological conditions present in the body , nor the interactions among different cell types .
Cells used in tests are often transformed or cancerous , exhibiting differences in gene expression and cell cycles .
In spite of this , high correlation coefficients are obtained when indicators for general acute in vitro toxicity are compared to LD50 values in vivo .
So , it appears that toxicities depend mostly on actions at the intracellular level , as opposed to the extracellular level .
In vitro systems can use whole organs , tissue slices or cultured cells .
Cultured cells are very popular because detailed microscopic observations are fairly easy when cells grow on the bottom of a dish .
The human body typically contains about 100 trillion cells that fall into about 300 specialized types .
Basic cellular functions are expressed at different degrees in different types of cells .
For example , nervous system cells depend entirely on glucose for their energy requirements , while liver cells have high biotransformation as well as protein synthesis rates .
These differences imply that complete in vitro tests for integral toxicity screening may require consideration of multiple cell types .
Although mutagenicity and genotoxicity testing would seem to be the ideal situation to minimize the need for numerous targets ( all cells have similar DNA ) , even there , it has been found that results are enriched by the use of numerous models .
Selecting from the Cell Suspension Virtually all cell types can be grown in the laboratory over the full range of durations required for toxicity testing .
But some cells grow more easily than others .
Cells obtained from animal tissue will contain a number of cell types .
If the cells are grown for some time , the most hardy cell type may take over the culture .
Because cells spread on a plate tend to automatically fill the available gaps , cells that divide rapidly tend to dominate in vitro systems as the cells grow over time .
If one requires a specific cell type , it is possible to select for them using selective growth mediums , growth surfaces or toxicants .
Primary Cultures Primary Cultures are cells that were extracted from animals and have taken to growing in vitro .
One can culture liver , kidney , gland and endothelial cells as well as fibroblasts from adult animals .
Cells from the nervous system , heart and striated muscle are usually obtained from embryonic tissue , differentiating further in vitro .
When cells are obtained as primary cultures , it is necessary to characterize them , in order to define explicitly what we are working with .
The definition will usually include morphological and growth rate observations as well as the functional-biochemical properties specific to that cell and that may contribute to end-point observations in the experiment .
The closer the cells falls in comparison to cells in vivo , the better .
Although one would like such characterizations to be complete and encompassing , it is rarely possible to be completely reassured .
Another method , called cloning , is to mechanically capture a single or more cells and grow a culture from this material .
Normal Cells vs Cancer Cells Normal cells have a limited lifespan in vitro .
Consequently , unless aliquots of a cell suspension have been frozen , it is not possible to repeat exactly the same test twice .
Cancer or embryonic cells grow more readily than normal adult cells .
This is probably because less specialized cells tolerate more easily the artificial environment of cell culture , specifically the plastic or glass vessel , variations in the concentrations of artificial nutrients and fluctuations in pH .
This makes repetition of tests even in the far future a possibility .
Examples of variables that characterize in vitro models .
Stem Cells Stem cells can generate some or all of the cells in the body if properly controlled , and are therefore an important ingredient in regeneration of diseased tissue .
They must be provided with fresh liquid nutrients at least once a day , passaged each week and have been successfully cultured only on nutrient layers of mouse cells until recently .
These layers must be replaced every two weeks .
Hepatocyte Proximal Tubule Kidney Neurons 10-26 P450 activity Albumin production Gluconeogenesis Steroid hormone inducible tyrosineamino-transferase and glutaminesynthetase activities Pronounced Microvilli Alkaline phosphatase activity Maltase activity Tetanus toxin binding D2 and D3 proteins Neurotransmitter synthesis Neurotransmitter receptors Acetylcholinesterase activity High-affinity transport for transmitters and precursors 10.4.7 .
Cell Lines The difficulty of satisfactorily characterizing primary cultures has led many investigators to use a different tactic .
If cells are successfully cultivated over time , the most rapidly growing type will become dominant , becoming a cell line .
In some cases , the purity of cell lines can be increased by cloning .
When obtained from normal cells , the line will have finite lifespan ( 60-80 doublings ) , an obvious disadvantage if tests need to be repeated in the future .
If the starting material was cancerous , a continuous cell line can arise , which can be cultured indefinitely , an obvious advantage for future experiments .
However , cancer cells have diverse genotypes and phenotypes within the same culture , making them less than ideal for most tests , except tumor reduction experiments .
The ideal test object would be a normal cell that reproduces indefinitely , while expressing stable karyotype and phenotypes .
In the past it has been possible to transform normal cell lines using viral gene sequences or chemical exposure .
Transformed cell lines are immortal , and do not undergo senescence .
However , transformed cells are genetically metastable , and can lose or gain whole or partial chromosomes .
In many cases , transformed cell lines exhibit abnormal gene expression profiles that confound the study of biological mechanisms .
Recently , cells modified with human telomerase reverse transcriptase ( hTERT ) have become available , which have unlimited division potential as well as stability in karyotype and phenotype .
This continuity allows comparability of results from one experiment to the next , by freezing reference stocks to ensure an indefinite supply of cells .
Therefore , if one is willing to select from a long list , all the procedures of obtaining , selecting and characterizing cells can be avoided .
Also , so much research has been done on the popular cell lines , that rich literature dossiers are available .
Cell Line Fidelity Repeatedly culturing cells ( passaging cells from a old container with depleted medium to a new one with fresh medium ) selects genetic or epigenetic modifications for enhanced division that ultimately take over the culture .
Cell control mechanisms that would prevent this in vivo are not paralleled in vitro .
As cells are exposed to toxicants , the composition by cell type as well as the properties of the cell culture may drift , particularly if a test lasts for many cell generations .
Therefore , different experiments at different doses may finally contain different cell populations , even if the cells initiated from aliquots .
The problem of cell diversity within continuous cell lines is particularly evident in cancer cell lines .
Under the microscope , many different cell phenotypes can be seen .
Therefore , the continuous cell line can be viewed , under ideal conditions , as a stem cell producing a fixed proportion of various cell subtypes .
Human embryonic stem cells cultured for therapeutic purposes also accrue genomic changes , when cultured at length .
For example , 2 Mbase amplifications encompassing the myc oncogene , as well as A critical advantage of cell lines generally is that they have become standardized , and are being distributed to researchers at reasonable cost ( American Type Culture Collection , 10-27 amplification of the whole 17q arm .
Higher promoter methylation is also frequent .
12 Some components of the media will decay rapidly with time ( glutamine ) , such that the shelf life of freshly made medium is limited .
Both pH and osmolarity of the media must be controlled , a challenge in long duration tests .
pH can be somewhat controlled by using CO2 incubators or HEPES , an organic pH buffer .
Osmolarity varies over time because culture flasks are not tightly sealed in the incubator to allow CO2 and O2 equilibration .
As a result , some evaporation occurs unless the incubator is kept at 100 % relative humidity , which in turn favors multiplication of bacteria and fungi , always a threat in the cell culture lab .
On the other hand , some other cells types may not get enough oxygen in culture flasks , needing to build a tolerance for oxygen depletion .
When testing for toxicants that affect oxygen metabolism , measured effects may rate as too high or too low , depending on circumstances .
Cell Culture Medium The non-serum part of cell culture media is made of a number of pure chemicals mixed together to sustain cell cultures .
The problem of purity existing for animal food ( 10.2.6 ) is paralleled in culture media , because the food of animals used to provide serum may not be tightly controlled , making the composition of their serum unreliable , even if known .
When serum is purchased , the “ batch ” number is specified , in an effort to eliminate variability in terms of growth rates or immune components , for example .
Serum-free media eliminate serum supplements , improving the stability of results and reproducibility , but they also remove complex protective components such as albumin , a natural part of the buffering and detoxification action of the blood .
Albumin ( often bovine serum albumin ) being such a complex molecule , it is almost impossible to purify it completely , so its re-inclusion to supplement chemically defined media introduces variability .
Rates of cell division generally also tend to diminish in serum-free media because of the absence of growth factors normally present in the blood .
But increasing insulin levels decreases the activity of the SKN-1 protein , which normally promotes a set of Phase II detoxification enzymes ( glutathione among them ) that remove free radicals , leaving the cell more vulnerable to ROS17 .
Determining Test Doses for In Vitro Systems If animals appear normal at the beginning of an in vivo test , this guarantees a physiologically valid baseline .
In animal testing , the general appearance and behavior of animals also acts as an effective guide to proper toxicant dosing .
The corresponding guides in cell cultures are not so obvious .
The normalcy of an in vitro situation is not as clear because many cell cultures represent quite artificial conditions .
For example , cells in culture are adapted to strong changes in the levels of nutrients and metabolites as a result of cell culture medium renewal .
When doses of the toxicant are administered , doses could be used that would kill whole animals simply because the most susceptible tissues are not included in the test system .
10-28 To compensate , a larger range of doses may need to be tested in vitro to gain perspective , which has the advantage of being more informative .
One must be particularly cautious of toxicants with endocrine disruptor capabilities which are extremely potent , and may display flat or U-type dose responses .
For example , in cell cultures , doses of TCDD as low as 10-11 M are toxic , with decreased viability observed even in nonproliferating cells .
Also , the amount of plasma protein available in the medium for binding of toxicants will affect effective concentration .
Penetration through cell membranes may take seconds to hours , depending on the properties of the agent .
As described in Chapter 8 , biotransformation should be maintained in vitro to more closely represent in vivo situations .
Ideally , an excretion route should be provided , although this is beyond the capability of most in vitro test systems .
Testing Techniques Although there are many limits to in vitro testing , the attractions of high speed , sensitivity , reproducibility and economy are quite strong .
As a result , there is considerable interest in developing in vitro techniques to increase the usefulness by astute selection of highly specific molecular probes or by using in vitro test batteries ( multiple tests ) .
Whether cells are intoxicated can be measured in a variety of ways .
Active exclusion of substances such as Trypan Blue .
Dead cells ultimately present holes in their membranes , because they are not maintained .
Therefore , particles of Trypan Blue inside cells are a sign of cell death , since this pigment does not penetrate normal cells .
Active uptake of substances such as Neutral Red .
Neutral Red is a supravital dye which accumulates inside the lysosomes of living cells .
The pigment from dead cells is easily washed away .
Present in muscle , red blood cells and liver , the molecule will leak out if the cell is damaged , and can be found in the plasma .
Loss of activity of intracellular enzymes , such as in the tetrazolium stain test .
Toxicokinetic Characteristics In Vitro When toxicologists administer a drug to an animal at a certain dose , sight is often lost of the fact that the agent is metabolized and excreted , and it is implied that a single concentration is valid for the entire inter-bolus period .
If specific toxic phenomena are indeed related to agent concentration , this assumption would tend to smear toxic transitions and retard detailed understanding .
The situation is similar in vitro , with the difference that a high ratio of medium to cell volume may stabilize the agent , as well as other concentrations .
There is also the possibility for active control of agent concentration to clarify toxic thresholds .
But there have been few serious attempts in the past to control in vitro environments actively and automatically , because of practical difficulties .
If the agent to be studied is sufficiently soluble in the culture medium , it can be added directly and perhaps even controlled by renewing the medium .
If the substance is not , dissolution can be aided using an organic solvent such as ethanol or dimethylsulfoxide ( DMSO ) , although these substance may introduce effects of their own , for example by allowing easier penetration through cellular membranes .
For proper dosing , it should be verified that precipitates of the agent do not 10-29 pale yellow solution to a dark blue formazan crystals , which reveals metabolic activity .
Reduced synthetic activity for molecules such as albumin .
Made in liver cells and secreted extracellularly .
The EEC 's policy of no animal testing for the development of novel cosmetics has given impetus to in vitro methods .
In the pharmaceutical industry , in vitro methods are frequently used in screening for new drugs .
Therefore , in vitro success determines in large part the cost of drug development .
More relevance can be obtained from in vitro testing by - acquiring knowledge of basic physiology , so that relevant molecular targets are chosen and - by multiplying the number of molecular targets and tests , taking advantage of automation ( screening ) .
These dish formats are supported by an array of instruments for sample preparation , scanning readers and washers .
Many tests depend on simple colorimetric or cellular observations on material that is less complex than what they are intended to represent .
For example , activation of a single heat stress gene may not have the same meaning as the activation of an array of genes as a result of thermal insult .
Artificial skin tests , for the most part , barely make an attempt at reproducing the architecture of the skin .
Can a dye penetration test represent well the most basic phenomenon present in skin , such as erythema ?
Fluorescence-activated cell-sorting In pharmacology , physiology and mechanistic toxicology , molecularly targeted information is obtained using chemical techniques dependant on the availability of specific fluorescent antibodies or dyes .
The fluorescence enhances contrast with the background image .
Fluorescent techniques identify and localize specific molecules within a specimen .
This leads to spectacular images with multiple stainings .
Note that in publications , the pictures always seems to prove the point of the article , but that you much more rarely see a systematic analysis of all the available microscopy fields , together with quantitative analysis .
Multi-Well Test Techniques Automation of tests will provide more information per unit of human effort .
There has been a drive towards assay miniaturization , similar to Large Scale Integration in the electronics industry , aimed at the development of High Throughput biological assay 10-30 Flow cytometry is more easily quantified than classical microscopy , but is not as easily automated for time series analysis .
Flow cytometry has been used for cellular work and to diagnose diseases of the blood and bone marrow , allowing discrimination based on fluorescent labels targeted to specific cellular markers .
Implementation of Cytotoxicity Testing Mammalian cell cultures currently evaluate biocompatibility and toxicity of materials in medical devices and associated products .
A variety of cell types ( T10.25 ) which differ in relative sensitivity and in the time required to conduct the assay are used .
These methods have shown good correlation with animal assays and are frequently more sensitive to toxic materials .
Several of these cytotoxicity test procedures are widely accepted in biomaterial screening , quality control and audit programs .
If basic engineering problems of image segmentation , interpretation and analysis could be solved , the power of these techniques could be enhanced .
In this technique , individual living cells are sucked through a fine capillary so that they line up .
As they go through a laser beam , scattered light allows various determinations to be performed .
Cell Lines in Common use in Cytotoxicity Testing .
L929 Mouse fibroblast WI-38 Human embryonic lung HeLa Epitheloid carcinoma of the human cervix VERO Monkey kidney cells 10.4.13.1 .
Direct Contact and Agar Overlay Used for evaluation of biomaterials : well-characterized , easy to culture and reproducible .
Duplicate samples of test material , as well as negative and positive controls , are placed in direct contact with the cell layer for 24 hours .
The monolayers are fixed and stained and finally examined microscopically for the presence of morphological changes , decolorization , reduction in cell density or lysis induced by the test material .
Specialized tests for virucidal efficacy testing .
Measuring the growth of cells over time ( ~a week ) as they are exposed to toxicants is the gold standard of cytotoxicity measurements .
It measures the ability of cells to divide and form colonies .
Cell counting , particularly if done automatically to insure statistical significance , has the potential to detect reliably both low-dose and high-dose effects of toxicants .
Minimum Essential Medium Elution and End Point Titration The test material is extracted for 24 hours in Minimum Essential Medium ( MEM ) .
The USP method requires testing in duplicate while the ISO method requires triplicate plates .
Extracts of test materials shown to be toxic in the Minimum Essential Medium Elution Test can be serially diluted ( End Point Titration ) to determine the highest dilution for which there is no toxic response .
Alterations in Cell Growth Water extracts of graded quantities of the test material are made and incorporated into tissue culture medium .
The extracts or serial dilutions are evaluated for inhibition of cell growth by determining the protein content of monolayers at zero time and 72 hours after incubation under standard conditions .
Data are expressed as the amount of test material which results in minimal inhibition of cell growth ( less than or equal to 10 % ) or 50 % inhibition of cell growth .
This procedure can be used for evaluation of medical device plastics , ophthalmic solutions and similar products .
If toxicity is going to be measured in terms of cell growth , we have to interpret cell growth in terms of toxicity .
When immune cells divide quickly , it is usually because of a raging immune response .
On the other hand , all cells have complex growth mechanisms that are vulnerable to almost any type of metabolic toxicity , providing a wide-ranging net for toxicity detection .
Human cells in culture can be observed over time with automated computer vision systems .
Advanced Applications of Cell Culture in Toxicology Microscopy , computer imaging and automated cell tracking can be implemented for days on 96-well dishes contained in incubators ( F10.27 ) .
This allows a continuous and detailed record to be kept in the form of thousands of images .
The advantage of such advanced systems is that they allow the simultaneous measurement of changes in cell division rate , reproductive sterilization , necrosis and apoptosis .
Such detailed data on cell behavior is of great value for cancer research .
It is also correlates with reduced body weight9 in animals .
Angiosarcoma of the liver in the manufacture of vinyl chloride .
The concept of multispecies testing in industrial toxicology .
Distinct requirements for ras oncogenesis in human versus mouse cells .
Toxic effects of some xanthine derivatives with special emphasis on adverse effects on rat testes .
Genomic alterations in cultured human embryonic stem cells .
Chemically Diverse Toxicants Converge on Fyn and c-Cbl to Disrupt Precursor Cell Function .
Laboratory diet profoundly alters gene expression and confounds genomic analysis in mouse liver and lung .
Enzymatic activity is similar in both segments , both having a number of cell types in common .
The functions of several cells are poorly understood .
Anatomy The general anatomy of the human respiratory system is depicted in F3.4 .
Some characteristics of the human lung are shown in T11.1 .
Human Pulmonary Characteristics Exchange Area ( air ) Area of the Pulmonary Capillaries ( blood ) Number of Alveoli Air-Blood Barrier Thickness Particle Size penetrating Alveolar Space Respiration Rates Every cell from the Type 1 to tracheal epithelial cells can now be cultured and studied , and tissue culture of lung cells is now common to study the lung .
A large amount of research is done with rodents , large animals are not often used .
Animal Anatomy It is not easy to extrapolate data obtained from animal experiments , usually conducted by nose-only inhalation , to humans .
Thus , animal experimentation must be carefully assessed when considering pulmonary uptake and toxicity in humans .
Bronchi A system of bronchial tubes leads air to 300 million alveoli in Inspirations the lung .
Because of the considerable expansion of the air section of the airways , flow resistance is not concentrated at the lowest level of the lung .
Because of the considerable surface area , as well as because of rapid diffusion through gases , early systemic effects from pulmonary acquisition of a toxicant is usually as rapid as the sleep-inducing effects of a volatile organic anesthetic .
The agent is rapidly absorbed into the systemic circulation .
The blood returning from the lungs goes directly to the heart and is pumped out into the periphery , more than 20 % directed to the brain .
Percent of total respiratory deposition following exposure to diluted cigarette smoke .
The walls of the alveoli are made of thin epithelium and elastic fibers .
A log-log graph showing the geometry of the total cross sectional interface of the lungs vs linear distance into it .
100 ml of blood interfaces within the lungs with air through membranes as little as 0.14 µm in thickness .
Acute lung exposures as well as oxygen deprivation often produce edema in the lung ( F11.9 ) , similar to drowning in your own body fluids , because of reduced transfer of O2 and CO2 .
Pulmonary edema : red areas show leaking of fluid from capillaries to the alveoli of the lungs .
Nitric oxide can be administered to treat pulmonary edema .
Blood capillary of the wall of an alveolus .
The alveolar space is filled with air .
The Endothelium contains the blood , the Epithelium lines the alveoli .
The airway mucosa brings inspired air to body temperature and humidity , and removes bacteria and particulates .
If you breathe too fast in the winter , your deeper lungs can become irritated as a result of incomplete temperature and humidity equilibration .
Immune cell activity is prevalent in the lung , as shown by the cytokines and other cellular mediators that are washed out of the lung in vivo experiments .
Cilia The mucus secreted within the airway is thin at the base of the cilia , so as not to impair movement , and thick at top to trap particles .
Aggressors There are 2000 agents known to collectively produce various types of lung diseases .
While gases may reach all the way to the alveolar sac , vapors will deposit along the secondary and tertiary airways ( small bronchi and bronchioles ) , depending on the droplet diameter , while dusts and particles may penetrate beyond the bronchi or even the nose and throat , according to size ( T11.13 . ) .
The particles can be cleared by the lung in the sputum , can be dissolved by immune attack from macrophages or can remain in the lung as permanent irritants , potentially causing disease .
There is no dose-effect relationship on the basis of particle weight in respiratory diseases .
Most of the mass of aerosolized dusts is made of large particles which precipitate quickly , trapped in the nose and throat .
The important fraction is the number of particles per unit volume below 6 µm , because it can be deposited in the lung .
role in the response to respiratory pollutants .
The Nalp3 inflammasome is also involved in responses to bacteria .
Particle Pathology The general particulate matter pathology term for the lung is pneumoconiosis , defined as the accumulation of dust in the lungs , and tissue reactions to its presence .
Cascade impactors have been developed to divide contaminated air samples into respirable and non-respirable fractions .
Levels above this standard indicate poor ventilation practices .
Dust deposition in the lungs often leads to chronic restrictive disease , because there is a reduction in lung elasticity , without significant airway disease .
This occurs after many years of exposure to fibrogenic or nonfibrogenic materials .
The term fibrogenic describes the chronic deposition of scarred tissue ( collagen ) in place of normal lung tissue .
The collagen is nonfunctional , and tends to reduce gas exchanges .
Those microscopic bodies are visible under appropriate stains and originate from unsuccessful macrophage attack of asbestos particles with iron-containing lysosomes .
That size matters is obvious from the practices of the tattoo parlor .
For tattoos to endure , the pigments have to be the right size .
They must be small enough for macrophages to envelop , but not so small that they will be digested and cleared away by the cells .
His exposure history ( limited exposure to silica dust ) and slow disease progression were consistent with coal workers ' pneumoconiosis .
Irritation Response to Particles Particulate airborne pollutants , such as asbestos and silica act through a multiprotein complex known as the Nalp3 inflammasome which signals exposure of macrophages to internalized particles of asbestos and silica .
This leads to the activation of a potent inflammatory response .
Case 2. accelerated clinical course is more consistent with silicosis development than coal workers ' pneumoconiosis .
This rapid disease development is atypical of the usual clinical progression of coal workers ' pneumoconiosis , which can take 20-40 years to develop , and is more consistent with silicosis .
Silicosis Silicosis results from repeated ingestion of particles of quartz rock dust ( SiO2 ) from such activities as sandblasting .
They die , releasing toxic compounds that lead to fibrosis .
The chronic form can take decades .
The prognosis is quite poor in moderate to severe cases .
Although he had spent most of his mining years as a roof bolter , a job generally associated with silica-dust exposure , his disease development pattern was more consistent with coal workers ' pneumoconiosis than silicosis .
Asbestosis There are various types of asbestos : crocidolite , amiosite , and chrysotile , that have been used in various types of insulation .
While there is less elastin detected in asbestosis , more of the different types of collagen are found .
The disease takes 20-40 years to develop , and the clinical outlook is poor .
Controlling exposure is the only solution .
Clara cells with high xenobiotic metabolism will proliferate at the level of bronchioles and alveoli , even replacing mucus cells in an effort to proliferate and repair the lung ’ s epithelium .
This exposure pattern and 11-8 replenish , and symptoms are always worse when returning to work .
There are significant changes in maximal expiratory flow rates from spirometry , after exposure .
If protection is implemented , disease is reversible , but permanent airway constriction can occur otherwise .
Passing a battery of tests to measure the severity of asthma .
The longer you work with symptoms of occupational asthma , the less likely complete recovery becomes .
These symptoms usually include coughing , wheezing , chest tightness and shortness of breath .
The symptoms often start while at work , improve at home but sometimes awaken the person at night .
ROS are induced by NADPH oxidase and the high iron content in asbestos further catalyzes hydroxyl radicals .
The cell then generates TNF and other chemoattractants , stimulating fibrosis and tumor formation .
Byssinosis While there is a strong component related to the mechanical effects of the dust particles in byssinosis ( brown lung in cotton mill workers , silo worker 's lung , farmer 's lung ) , there is also an antigenic component , since the organic vegetable matter will draw an immunological response over time .
Cotton , flax or hemp fibers trigger mast cells to release histamine , constricting the bronchi .
Histamine stores need to 11-9 experience itchy or watery eyes , stuffy , runny nose and skin rashes .
Toluene diisocyanate is widely used as an additive in the production of polyurethane foam and paints .
Once the individual is sensitized , very small concentrations are effective in producing obstructive reactions .
Over years , if the correct diagnosis is not made and if exposure persists , the lungs can be permanently damaged .
10 % of the victims of this disease do not develop full-blown reactions , and they simply experience insidious shortness of breath .
When the symptoms become more severe , and the situation is recognized , heavy lung damage has often already occurred .
11-10 Persons at Risk Laboratory workers , animal handlers , veterinarians Pigeon breeders , poultry workers , bird fanciers Grain workers Entomologists Crab and prawn processors Bakers Food processors Tea workers Tobacco manufacturers Carpenters , sawmill operators , cabinetmakers Detergent industry workers Pharmaceutical industry workers , biomedical researchers Workers with polyurethane , plastics , and varnish Automobile spray painters Workers with epoxy resins and plastics Tanners Platinum refiners Metal platers Aluminum solderers Electronic workers Pharmaceutical workers Workers with plastics and rubbers Insulators Refrigeration workers Hairdressers Sensitizing Agent Rats , mice , rabbits , guinea pigs Pigeons , chickens , budgerigars Grain mites Moths and butterflies Crabs and prawns Wheat flour , rye flour Coffee beans , castor beans Tea leaves Tobacco leaves Wood dusts , including western red cedar dust Bacillus subtilis Pepsin , trypsin , bromelain Toluene diisocyanate Hexamethylene diisocyanate Phthalic , trimellitic , and other anhydrides Chromium Platinum Nickel Aminoethylethanolamine Colophony Penicillins , cephalosporins , methyldopa , spiramycin , tetracycline Azodicarbonamide Urea , formaldehyde Freon Persulfate salts , henna The involvement of the immune system in hypersensitivity Pneumonitis is highlighted in “ detergent worker 's lung ” .
After a certain time , an asthma-like condition results when the protein antigens are absorbed through nasal membranes or in the lungs .
If substances do not cause either pulmonary fibrosis or sensitization of the pulmonary immune response , they are considered inert .
However they can still load the respiratory clearance mechanisms ( mucociliary , phagocytosis ) to the point where physical blockage occurs , with a reduction in air flow , and labored respiration .
Chemical asphyxiants like CO , H2S and cyanide on the other hand alter oxygen-carrying capacity or respiratory enzymes .
Irritant Gases Water soluble gases do not go very far into the lung .
Many gases such as ammonia , halogen acids ( HF , HCl , HBr ) , oxides of sulfur , hydrogen sulfide , sulfuric and nitric acids , all are irritant to the upper respiratory tract because of their great solubility in the mucus of the nose and throat .
Fortunately , these agents are sufficiently irritant to warn the exposed individual of their presence before dangerous exposures are reached .
Exceptions to this rule are hydrogen sulfide and ammonium sulfide , where tolerance to the odor can occur and hypoxia strike without warning .
Parakeets Chickens Pigeons Turkeys Cheese mold Coffee dust Corn dust Detergents ( process or use ) Moldy hay or grain Farmer 's lung Furrier 's lung Humidifier/air cond .
Wood pulp-worker 's lung 11-11 Hair dust Humidifiers/air conditioners Sawdust Malt dust Moldy maple bark Cloth wrapping of mummies Mushroom compost Moldy wood pulp Moldy paprika Pituitary powder Moldy redwood dust Smallpox scabs Moldy cork dust Tea plants Wheat flour Moldy logs Scientific American Antigen Responsible Various aspergilli Unknown Thermophilic actinomycetes ( Thermoactinomyces vulgaris ) Unknown antigen ( may be present in avian droppings or serum ) Penicillium casei Unknown Unknown Bacillus subtilis Micropolyspora faeni , T. vulgaris , T. sacchari IgG antibody reactions at peripheral bronchi .
Unknown Thermophilic actinomycetes Unknown Various aspergilli Cryptostroma corticale Unknown Thermophilic actinomycetes Various species of Alternaria Mucor stolonifer Unknown Various species of Graphium Unknown Penicillium frequetans Unknown Sitophilus granarius Various species of Alternaria carbonyl [ Ni ( CO ) 4 ] or MMT ( shown ) , manganese methylcyclopentadienyl tricarbonyl ) , and volatile hydrides ( arsine , stibine , lithium , phosphorusphosphine [ PH3 ] ) all show greater toxicity than their respective metals or metalloids , due to their volatility , fine aerosols , and ready absorption through the lung because of their lipophilicity .
Respiratory irritants classified by vulnerable region .
Upper Tract Tract and Lungs Terminal passages and Air sacs Aldehydes Alkaline dusts Ammonia Chromic acid Sulfur di/trioxide Ethylene oxide HCl , HF Br , Cl , F , I Ozone Chlorine oxides Sulfur chlorides P trichloro-penta- chloride Dimethyl sulfate Toluene diisiocyanate Arsenic trichloride Nitrogen dioxide Nitrogen tetroxide Phosgene Organic solvents SO2 will penetrate the lung if adsorbed on particles , but NO2 , CO and H2S can reach to the alveoli on their own .
Such agents usually have a lower water solubility , or hydrolyze in the mucus to produce irritating secondary agents such as carbonyl chloride ( phosgene ) and oxides of nitrogen .
Some irritants alter respiratory function and these changes are distinctive in some cases .
Metals , particularly when freshly generated as fumes , are of small enough particle size to penetrate deeply into the lung , and will be efficiently absorbed .
Agents inducing Chemical Toxicity Vapors and gases can have devastating effects on the pulmonary tissue , damaging Type II Alveolar and Clara cells that contain the Phase I and II enzyme systems involved in xenobiotic biotransformation .
In addition , as the Alveolar Type II and Clara cells die , their place is taken up by fibrotic cells .
Unfortunately , fibrotic cells are not adapted to gas exchange , leading to hypoxia .
Oxidative stress is a major aggressor in the lung : breathing 100 % oxygen destroys the lungs in about three days by superoxidation While highly polar when absorbed by inhalation or by ingestion of concentrated formulation , paraquat concentrates in the lung as a result of a diamine-polyamine transport system .
These derivatives attack polyunsaturated lipids in cell membranes to produce lipid hydroperoxides which , in turn react with other unsaturated lipids to form more lipid-free radicals , thereby perpetuating the system .
The resulting damage to cell membranes and to subcellular organelles ( mitochondria ) reduces the functional integrity of the cells , affects efficient gas transport and exchange and impairs respiration by destroying essential cell types ( Alveolar Type II , Clara cells ) .
This fosters the proliferation of fibrotic cells and a loss of elasticity of the lung .
In the first world war , the use of chlorine , mustard gas and phosgene produced 1,250,000 casualties .
Mechanism of cellular action of paraquat .
11-13 polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons ( PAHs ) from a variety of petrochemical products , combustion products of tobacco , asbestos , nickel , beryllium , cadmium , and low molecular weight , volatile chemicals capable of being converted in vivo to highly reactive and unstable intermediates that can mutate DNA .
may have potentially toxic chemicals adhering to the surface of the particle .
When inhaled and deposited in the lung , it is possible for the toxicant to desorb from the particle into the mucosal surface of the nasal passages , larynx , bronchi , etc .
This results in high concentrations of toxicant localized in small regions , for example the bifurcation point in a bronchus where particles build up .
Mostly , lung cancer originates at the level of the bronchioles .
From the above , it is not surprising that the International Agency for Research on Cancer ( IARC ) has classified diesel engine exhaust as carcinogenic to humans ( Group 1 ) , based on sufficient evidence that exposure is associated with an increased risk for lung cancer and limited evidence for an increased risk of bladder cancer .
The IARC Working Group also concluded that gasoline exhaust was possibly carcinogenic to humans ( Group 2B ) .
There are currently no limits on such emissions , but to control the cancer risk , they would probably have to be set below 20 µg/m3 .
Agents of Lung Cancer Lung cancer is an important cause of mortality , and is caused by many factors .
The cells of origin of many lung tumors are unknown .
Cigarette smoke is an important cause .
can all be combined to result in cancer .
Even stress and nutrition are implied as etiologic agents .
In contrast to what was described above for chemically induced lung damage , carcinomas generally arise from long-term exposure to low concentrations of : 11.2.11 .
Cigarettes volatile amines ( convertible to N-nitroso compounds ) , Effects of air-borne industrial agents on health are small in comparison with the effect of cigarette smoking .
As a result of disturbed alveolus anatomy , there is accumulation of uncirculated air pouches in the lung .
1. paralysis of cilia ( one puff of cigarette smoke can paralyze the cilia for 20-40 minutes ) , 2. irritation of the mucosa , 3. increased secretion of mucus , leading to reduced effective bronchiole size , 4. hypertrophy of mucus glands encroaching on airway lumen and leading to increased air flow resistance , 5. disabling of macrophages ’ functions , 6. increase in macrophage and leukocyte population and decrease in level of proteolytic enzyme inhibitors , leading to progressive digestion of the septa .
Bronchial responsiveness can be important in establishing a diagnosis of asthma .
Acetylcholine , histamine or other chemicals can be used to provoke an obstructive episode .
But dry , cold air is the safest agent to use .
Asthma and bronchitis primarily affect the bronchial tubes .
Asthma is an obstructive ( obstruction to air flow ) lung disease , as opposed to fibrosis which is restrictive lung disease ( mechanical compliance of the lung is reduced – lung stiffens ) .
Nicotine shifts cells of the body into high gear , mimicking acetylcholine .
Nicotine prevents apoptosis and boosts cell survival .
Dermatologists say that nicotine can speed dermal fibroblasts to go through a 10 week growth phase in only 10 days .
Spirometry Spirometry is the measurement of expired and inspired lung volumes .
There are four subdivisions of total lung volume ( see F11.23 : About 600 additives have been used in cigarettes , one of which is ammonia .
Nicotine in cigarette smoke is initially in the form of an electrically charged non-volatile acid , preventing passage into the blood .
Ammonia converts the acid to a free base or uncharged alkaline form , enhancing transfer into the lungs by as much as 100 times .
A similar procedure is used to treat cocaine with alkaline materials to produce crack , which is much more lipid-soluble4 .
Effect 6 above is more familiarly known as emphysema , which is digestion of the walls of the alveoli through 11-15 Tidal volume ( VT ) , the volume of air inspired and expired with each breath , Inspiratory Reserve Volume ( IRV ) , the maximum volume of air that may be inhaled beyond the normal tidal breath , Residual Volume ( RV ) , the volume of air that remains in the lungs after maximal expiration , an Expiratory Reserve Volume ( ERV ) , the maximum volume that may be exhaled between resting end-tidal position and residual volume .
A normal spirogram compared to those in obstructive and restrictive lung disease .
Subjects with restrictive lung disease will have reduced FVC and FEV1 but a normal or increased FEV1/FVC ratio , because both the FVC and FEV1 are reduced by similar amounts .
Spirometry test results are compared to tables of predicted values derived from a normal population of non- The forced vital capacity ( FVC ) curve is determined by asking the subject to give a maximum expiration as rapidly as possible after a maximum inspiration .
Results are in liter and expressed as a percentage of the expected Vital Capacity .
In acute silicosis there is usually a rapid progressive decline in pulmonary function with eventual respiratory failure .
Restrictive Lung Disease Lung function abnormalities in classic , simple silicosis are uncommon in the early stages , even when the chest x-ray shows small rounded opacities .
Multi-factorial effects of cigarette smoking , the type of dust involved ( such as a mixture of dusts ) , the dose of the dust and the duration of exposure , and the presence of other pulmonary diseases such as tuberculosis may contribute in the alteration of an individuals patient ’ s pulmonary function .
Autoradiographic analysis of guinea pig airway tissues following inhalation exposure to 14C-labeled methyl isocyanate .
The pathologic and immunologic responses to inhaled trimellitic anhydride in rats .
Ultrafine Particulate Pollutants Induce Oxidative Stress and Mitochondrial Damage .
Lung cancer risk among female textile workers exposed to endotoxin .
3 12-1 Since adverse reproductive outcomes are common , the detection of those that are specifically related to chemicals is difficult .
But recent evidence points to more troubling results .
Reproductive Toxicology studies the occurrence , causes , manifestations , and sequelae of adverse effects of exogenous agents on reproduction .
The potential for an interaction between a chemical and one of the many stages of reproduction is almost inexhaustible .
Vulnerability of Reproduction In humans , 1out of 8 pregnancies spontaneously miscarry because of structural chromosome abnormalities in the fetus .
Reproductive Outcomes in Human Development While women are born with 1 million oocytes , only about 500 turn into full-fledged eggs over their lifetime .
Drugs and environmental chemicals have traditionally accounted for only a very small percentage of malformations in man ( T12.1 ) , and the situation was believed the same for fetal wastage ( spontaneous abortions ) .
12-2 sensitivity of toxicant detection is magnified to the point where some specificity is lost .
Vulnerability of Cell Division The process of giving birth is composed of gametogenesis , fertilization and embryonic and fetal development , all events that depend heavily on cell division .
Gametogenesis , for example , is vulnerable because the stem cells involved in spermatogenesis and oogenesis undergo several cycles of mitosis ( replication as diploid cells ) followed by stages of meiosis ( reduction in the number of chromosomes to a haploid state ) .
To carry out these activities , the nucleic acids ( DNA ) must be dissociated from the protective protein ( histones ) that normally surround the nucleic acid , leaving them exposed to chemical attack .
Cell division is resource , hormone and cytokine dependant , and division speed influences the outcome of embryo structures .
Any toxicity , even only changing the speed of processes , can induce problems in embryo structure .
Considering the level of cell division that occurs in the process of reproduction , it is surprising that so few cancers develop in association with the process .
In spite of all precautions , test-tube babies are twice as likely as naturally conceived babies to have multiple major birth defects and are more likely to be under weight at birth .
Any agent capable of altering the speed of cell processes , such as so-called cell division checkpoints , is a potential teratogen .
There are specific reasons for this : the Hox genes ( homeobox ) make up a set of conserved genes that setup an animal 's body plan .
The physical order of the Hox genes along the chromosomes corresponds to body sequence : head , thorax then abdomen .
This is also the order in which genes are activated during development , so timing is important .
Small differences It is believed that in pregnancy , to preserve the reproductive process , toxicity defenses of women are hyperactive , leading to such symptoms as chronic nausea ( F12.3 ) .
In this case , the 12-3 may be tolerated : much of the observed variations in dogs result from genes that alter development speed .
But when pregnant sheep eat the “ corn lily ” mountain flower , they give birth to lambs with grotesque birth defects , such as a missing eye .
The chemical responsible was named cyclopamine .
It is known that cyclopamine specifically inhibits the growth of certain brain cancer cells ( medulloblastoma ) 11. emerge , but understandably , most alterations lead to functional reductions .
Up- or Down- regulation of Nerve Transmission It is thought that exposure of developing fetuses to certain drugs , for example , serotonin reuptake inhibitors , can leave a permanent imprint in their brains ( see Figure below ) .
In heterochrony , the timing of developmental events is changed , and as a result radically different structures can emerge .
Some structures could , as a result , come in contact with other structures from which they are normally separated .
Heterotopy was shown in animals to result in a variety of phenomena , such as extra set of legs or wings , or entirely unique structures .
The bone structure of chickens and turtles uses the same building blocks , but heterochrony and heterotopy produce entirely different body plans .
A developing baby exposed to Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inihibitors may set its serotonin system diffrently .
The scapula ( shoulder blade ) ends up in different locations in different animals as a result of different developmental timing .
Teratogenicity Index What levels of exposures can produce malformations , as compared to generally detectable toxicity ?
The definition below relates an incidence of some form of teratogenicity to some form of toxicity ( maternal mortality , in F12.6 ) .
Relative Teratogenicity Index = LD01/tD05 This explains why reproduction is so vulnerable : small changes in the speed of processes individualize a person , but larger changes can lead to malformations .
When malformations can be stabilized into a coherent whole , a different body plan may An RTI of 1 means that toxicity is not specific to the embryo , because a number of mothers also suffer toxicity .
An RTI of 4 is the formal threshold indicating that the embryo is more sensitive than the adult .
Sertoli cells are the elongated cells in the tubules of the testes to which the spermatids are initially attached ( F12.8 ) .
Using tight junctions , Sertoli cells also provide the blood-testis barrier which maintains different fluid compositions in the blood and in the lumen of the seminiferous tubule , which is important for sperm development .
The barrier also prevents immune attacks on sperm by the male ’ s immune system .
The outcome of the teratogenicity can be interruption of the reproductive process , or alteration of the newborn ( classical teratogenesis ) .
Sperm Eggs normally repair any damage in their fertilization partners , so scientists have been more concerned with eggs than sperm .
If as much as half of the sperm is abnormal in morphology or motility , the male is usually infertile .
Most spermatozoa would still appear normal .
The stem cells from which sperm arise are tough and quite resistant to damage since , at the level of the spermatogonium ( Type A ) , some of them appear to be recycled back to primordial cells , or at least to some intermediate to await the initiation of the next wave of spermatogonia .
Stages of development of mouse spermatozoa .
The importance of sperm mobility in determining conception may seem at first an odd Olympic event at the microscopic scale .
However , sperm mobility is largely determined by ATP , and this competition is probably nature ’ s way of selecting for effective ATP variants .
One approach to male contraception is to give men doses of testosterone .
This turns off production of FSH and LH that are necessary for sperm development .
Wi-Fi Electromagnetic radiation from Wi-Fi connections used in laptop computers decreases human sperm motility and increases sperm DNA fragmentation44 .
Chemicals Animals studies show that drugs , alcohol , radiation , pesticides , solvents and other chemicals produce effects handed from father to son .
Male mice exposed to cocaine pass on memory problems to their pups40 .
Male rats exposed to a fungicide ( vinclozolin ) in the womb can pass tumors and diseases of the prostate and kidney down for at least 3 generations39 .
Fathers who smoke or are exposed to PCBs increase offspring risk of brain tumors .
Babies of firefighters , painters , woodworkers , janitors and men exposed to solvents in the workplace are more likely to be miscarried , still born or to develop later cancers .
Temperature During their 10 weeks of development , spermatozoa are acutely sensitive to high temperatures .
Fathers exposed to excessive heat from saunas or electric blankets before they conceive children seem to have higher rates of brain cancer in their offspring30 .
The scrotum provides a temperature slightly below body temperature , which is important to maintain sperm production .
Once produced , sperm can survive at normal body temperature .
Age The offspring of teenage fathers have increased risk of premature birth and death and low birth weight 38 .
In the male , sporadic exposure to a reproductive toxicant may only affect the developing spermatozoa presently at certain 12-7 Parents over 40 have increased offspring incidence of autism and schizophrenia , and 6 times more likely to have children with Down syndrome37 .
Fathers over 50 are about 30 % more likely to have offspring suffering from autism , schizophrenia and Down syndrome , and to have daughters who develop breast cancer .
Time-Course of Gestation In early gestation , effects of chemicals are likely to be drastic , resulting in sterility or in loss of the embryo .
Sterility can result from interference in the synthesis of gametes ( sperm or ova ) , or from a lethal defect in fertilization .
Gonadotropins and ovarian hormones during the female cycle .
Until recently , it was thought that female mammals carried the entire complement of ova that they would use during their breeding lifespan .
These ova come from primordial germ cells formed during fetal development in utero which results in several million oogonia , the bulk of which become atresic ( degenerate ) .
A few survivors undergo meiotic reduction to the haploid state and become arrested in a meiotic prophase state F12.13 .
In the latter stages of gestation , structural or functional abnormalities are more frequent .
There are many examples of functional effects .
We will mention later the effects on alcohol on the developing brain .
Ovarian tissue may be affected toxicologically while in utero ( the developing female fetus is an exposed future mother ) or following exposure ex utero at any postpartum stage of development .
It now appears that germline cells persist in the ovaries of adult mice , and the same might be true in human females24 .
In the middle of the cycle , a surge of LH floods the ovarian follicle , triggering maturation and release of the egg .
The fetus may use antigens from the Major Histocompatibility Complex derived from his father ’ s genes .
Known facts8 : IDO , indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase , is an enzyme that immune cells use to suppress other immune cells by breaking down tryptophan , which immune cells may need to proliferate .
Cells at the placental interface produce IDO .
Observation : IDO inihibitors given to pregnant mice cause them to abort genetically distinct fetuses ONLY .
The first week of embryonic development in the oviduct and uterus : ovulation , fertilization , cleavage , formation of morula and blastocyst and beginning of implantation .
To each of these organogenic steps corresponds a `` toxic windows '' where particular replicating cells are hypersusceptible to chemical attack , frequently at a concentration of agent far below that required for normal toxicity .
3 % of newborns show some teratogenic anomaly at birth and an additional 4 % are labeled as defective at the end of the first year of life .
The later defects are functional ones that appear as the baby grows .
For an effect from the agent to occur , it has to be present at the right time and at the right concentration .
The time interval of greatest susceptibility is the period of organogenesis .
The red bars indicate major malformations , the white bars indicate functional alterations .
Organogenesis in humans is in the first 60 days after fertilization , unfortunately at a time when a woman may be unaware of her condition .
After these 60-days , the effects of chemicals on the fetus are more likely to be cancer , organ dysfunction , behavioral and developmental abnormalities .
or female ) should be protected from exposure if they are going to bear children .
Coming to the health specialist for relocation after finding out about a pregnancy can provide only partial protection , as exposure has likely already occurred .
Parents ( male Standard teratology testing protocols now demand that the pregnant test animal be exposed to the agent between days 6 and 15 ( for mouse and rat ) and between days 6 and 18 ( for the rabbit ) , thus covering the major span of organogenesis .
Nausea and vomiting tend to peak between the 8th and 12th week of pregnancy , the crest sensitivity of fetal tissues .
Rat responses to irradiation according to time of administration .
Periods of vulnerability are short in many animal models .
Animals from the same litter do not necessarily share the same fate .
Specific malformations associated with a chemical exposure will occur in a particular species at the critical periods corresponding to appearance and development of cellular structures ( F12.24 ) .
The time course of malformation probability in a specific organ system can follow different unfoldings , as shown in F12.23 .
Critical periods of gestation compared between human and rodent .
Rapid changes in the zebrafish embryo .
While animal experiments can be controlled closely , epidemiological investigations of teratogens in humans require an association between exposure and a `` congenital '' defect .
In the case of thalidomide , the number of phocomelia cases was orders of magnitude increased from the previously known incidence rate of this rare birth defect .
It took only a few months to identify thalidomide as the inducing agent .
But most chemicals induce birth defects at a low rate , the risk ratio or odds ratio usually being below 22 .
With so many confounding factors in epidemiological studies , it is difficult to obtain the tight associations needed to identify culprit chemicals in full confidence .
When testing for teratogenicity , it is often convenient to use models that develop rapidly and that are convenient to observe .
In the zebra fish , the first structures , such as the trunk muscles and the head , begin to form 10 hours after fertilization .
The heart pumps blood and the fish begins to move its tail within the first day .
The larvae hatch and start to swim when they are just a little more than 48 hours old .
By day 5 , the yolk is largely consumed and the embryo has been transformed into an independent organism .
By comparison , a 5-day-old human embryo is merely a blastocysta hollow ball of cells that has yet to attach itself to the lining of the mother 's uterus .
12-14 The vulnerable periods delimit times at which embryonic tissues have special properties relevant not only to toxicity but also to regeneration .
For example , female rats exposed to PCBs in the womb are more reluctant to mate .
Fertilization occurs when the ovum meets the upwardmigrating sperm in the region of the ampulla of the Fallopian tube .
To penetrate the layers of the oocyte ( the thick acellular zona pellucida and several layers of granulosa cells ) , the spermatozoon must have matured , becoming highly motile and fertile , and achieved capacitation ( changes in the sperm surface and chemical changes within ) .
The first , the acrosome reaction , results in a series of fusions between specific membranes , with the release of hydrolytic enzymes capable of penetrating the oocyte granulosa cells , digesting them .
The second , an enhanced or activated motility , provides the extra flagellar activity to thrust the sperm through the digested `` tunnel '' .
One can visualize that a highly reactive chemical in seminal fluid could interfere with these procedures , thereby reducing the fertility of the spermatozoa .
A two compartment toxicokinetic model adapted to explore the disposition of a xenobiotic during pregnancy .
This data is interesting in that some prenatal periods for humans correspond to postnatal exposure time windows for animals43 .
This rapidly dividing cell mass is susceptible to chemical attack and may die at later stages following implantation .
Fetal Compartment Since the fetus and placenta temporarily become supplementary organs in the female , compartmentalization is 12-15 the 1st to 2nd months of gestation .
Less drastic DNA damage in these rapidly dividing cells may result in implantation , but in loss of the fetus ( early or late fetal death ) or carriage of the affected fetus to term , resulting in some structural or functional anomaly .
Detailed genetic assessment of blastocysts reveals that many of the cells within them have major chromosomal abnormalities , confirming a high spontaneous incidence of mozaicism5 .
Exposure in rats reduces the size of the sperm-storing organs .
Boys exposed in the womb to higher concentrations of phthalates ( diethyl , dibutyl benzyl , butyl benzyl and diisobutyl ) had shorter anogenital distances , smaller penises and had testes that did not properly descend into the scrotum ( this suggests impaired production of testosterone ) 28 .
One quarter of US women have body concentrations sufficient to trigger theses effects .
Monobutyl phthalate and monbenzyl phathalate urine concentrations in human males have already been inversely associated with sperm count and motility .
Other phthalates are correlated with rhinitis and eczema .
Exposure to pesticides makes men less fertile .
Males exposed to TCDD ( dioxin ) in Seveso Italy are permanently less likely to have male children .
If exposed before the age of 10 , their sperm is feeble and depleted .
There are plans under way ( EPA ) to assess the effect on reproduction of endocrine disrupters of estrogen , androgen and thyroid hormones .
Because male embryos are more delicate , environmental pollution may contribute to the observed decrease in male births .
In infusion bags , the chemical apparently protects blood components from decay , possibly by inhibiting certain reactions7 .
Epididymis is a cordlike structure on the posterior edge of the testes where storage , transit and maturation of spermatozoa occurs .
Alcohol prevents cells guided by L1 from adhering to each other .
A single episode of alcohol exposure lasting 4 hours is enough to kill groups of cells by interfering with GABA , glutamate and serotonin .
are under normal height and weight Microcephalic Mental and Motor Retardation Speech impediments Hearing problems Swallowing/Feeding problems Hyperactive Slack muscles Autism/Aggressive/Social Problems Facial anomalies Heart defects Kidney defects Genital deformities Eye problems Bent crooked little finger Shortened and bent little finger Under-developed fingers Hip deformities Small teeth Pigeon Chest Concave chest Cleft palate Spinal dimple Hernia Hair growth on back of neck 12.10.2 .
Cigarettes Women who smoke reach menopause sooner than nonsmokers , possibly because their supply of eggs is smaller .
It is likely that smoking before pregnancy or during nursing also impairs the offspring ’ s supply of eggs .
This happened whether the mother was There have also been indications in rat studies that alcohol consumption in mothers can increase the risk of breast cancer in offspring22 .
Thalidomide Thalidomide , originally developed as a sedative in 1957 , was widely used , particularly in England and Germany , to stem morning sickness and nausea in pregnant women , with dramatic consequences .
Thalidomide was not marketed in the US on the basis of a handwritten memo by Frances Kelsey mentioning peripheral neuritis symptoms in adults ( a tingly numbness in the fingers ) .
The metabolite of nicotine nitrosamino ketone ( NNK , shown ) may increase the incidence of cancer in the offspring .
Women who complain of headaches or breathing problems associated with exposure to organic chemicals such as phenol , xylene , acetone and trichloroethylene are much more likely to have premature births or show birth defects in their offspring .
Thalidomide focused attention on chemical-induced birth defects and led regulatory agencies to introduce specific protocols to test for organ-specific teratogenicity .
Sound Postnatal growth in fetuses exposed to high levels ( 100 dB ) of continuous sound is slower in exposed than in controls .
Rats and mice would show no effects under the same exposure .
It has also been linked to miscarriage in women , although acetaminophen was not19.Thalidomide is approved since 1998 to treat complications of leprosy , and may be useful in the treatment of multiple myeloma or myelodysplasias , blood cancers notoriously resistant to chemotherapy as well as rheumatoid arthritis , tuberculosis and AIDS4 .
Thalidomide-affected babies continue to be born in developing countries where it is used for the treatment of leprosy .
A prominent anti-angiogenesis effect may explain its teratogenicity ( developing bones need extra capillaries ) as well as its effect in multiple myeloma ( squelching new blood vessel formation should starve cancer in the bone marrow ) .
Thalidomide is of interest because it regulates TNF-TNF-encourages the demise of tumor cells .
The next generation of daughters may also be affected .
It was found in 1999 that DES suppresses the activity of the Wnt-7a gene , influencing the development of the male and female reproductive tracts .
DES and metabolites in fetal and maternal tissues .
Delayed Teratogen Endocrine disruptors are a diverse class of chemicals ( DDT , DES , soy estrogens , atrazine , BPA and PCBs ) who disturb normal endocrine functions at very low concentrations , and display unusual dose-responses , making their detection difficult in experiments where large doses are typically used .
In adults , it is believed that interference with hormone action is mostly reversible , but that it may not be in the developing fetus or young child , permanently altering the organization of many critical body tissues .
It was believed at the time that insufficient amounts of estrogen led to miscarriage .
Women who have had substantial exposure to endocrine disruptors such as estrogen mimics are more likely to bear sons who develop testicular cancer .
BPA easily leaches into food containers when heated .
BPA mimics estrogen , and has been found in animal studies to alter prostate gland size , and shift the onset of sexual maturity .
BPA can also alter brain formation in female mouse fetuses , and later produce male behavior in adult females at very small doses , 25 ng/kg.day .
BPA may produce heart arrhythmias in females because at estrogen levels typically found in premenopausal women , the addition of BPA would spike vulnerability to arrhythmias , causing a higher mortality rate after heart attacks in premenopausal women , compared with men36 .
BPA may also produce permanent damage to a gene important for reproduction , HOXA10 , by loss of a methyl group , permanently altering its activity and rendering uterine tissue hypersensitive to the effects of estrogen37 .
When released in the environment , ethynylestradiol from birth control pills can alter the fertility of trout eggs at a level of 10 ppt16 .
Trace amounts of cadmium mimic estrogen and alter the reproduction of female rats by binding to estrogen receptors17 .
Exposure to cortisol , a hormone that crosses the placenta into the fetus , between the 5th and 7th week of gestation elevated blood pressure in offspring by 15 mm of Hg .
The fungicide vinclozolin promotes an epigenetic transgenerational phenotype involving a number of disease states .
Vinclozolin produces male infertility by acting transiently at the anti-androgenic time of embryonic sex determination to promote in the F1generation a spermatogenic cell defect and subfertility in the male .
Many troublesome substances originate in food .
from Chemical Exposures and Toxic Responses Sperm concentration Sperm viability Vital stain Hypo-osmotic swelling Sperm Motility Percent motile Curvilinear velocity Straight-line velocity Linearity Lateral head amplitude Beat cross frequency Sperm size and shape Morphology Morphometry Semen parameters pH Volume Marker chemicals from glands Toxicant or metabolite concentrations 12.12 .
Types of Reproductive Studies Because of the complexity of reproduction , diverse types and lengths of experimental studies of toxicity can be conducted ( T12.36 ) .
Types of Reproductive Toxicity Studies in Males and Females .
MALE FEMALE Sperm production study Pre-Implantation Studies Serial mating study Single generation study Extended mating study Multiple generation study Dominant lethal assay Fertility in continuous breeding In vitro tests Teratogenicity 12.12.1 .
In a Dominant Lethal Assay , the agent is dosed to result in fetal lethality from genetic mutations .
In Fertility in Continuous Breeding , breeding is forced throughout the lifetime of the animal .
There is a fundamental distinction between fertility studies and teratogenicity studies .
Note that it is not easy to uncover reproductive toxicity in males , in spite of a large number of available tests on semen ( T12.37 ) .
The gold standard test is still whether healthy offspring can be obtained .
An example of bio-accumulation is the recommendation by the US FDA for studies up to 3 generations in the evaluation of the effects of compounds ingested over long periods of time such as color , food additives and pesticides , which may leave residues in food-producing animals13 .
The male and female offspring are further treated with the agent from weaning through the mating period , and bred repeatedly .
The plastics , dioxin and jet fuel were found to promote earlyonset female puberty in F3 .
Spermatogenic cell apoptosis was affected transgenerationally .
Ovarian primordial follicle pool size was significantly decreased with all treatments transgenerationally .
Scientists must search through all the embryos of the F3 generation to find the mutants .
DNA regions with different methylation were identified for the various agents , and found to be widely distributed in the rat genome .
The chromosome number and 2–5 megabase regions size are indicated .
12-2 Another examples of such transgenerational transmission is the effect of tributyltin on obesity in the grand-children of exposed mice , in spite of zero subsequent exposure48 .
Toxicants of Sexual Maturity Sexual maturation in girls is delayed by lead concentrations ranging between 2 and 5 µg/dL , although the US limit in the blood is 10 µg/dL18 .
The US Association of Occupational and Environmental Clinics recommends intervention for pregnant women at 5 µg/dL .
Because lead crosses the placenta unencumbered , neurobehavioral and cognitive deficits in offspring are likely at 10 µg/dL , as well as preterm birth , decreased gestational maturity , lower birth weight , reduced postnatal growth , increased incidence of minor congenital anomalies , early neurologic or neurobehavioral deficits , and decreased intelligence at ages 3 to 7 .
Alteration of Sexual Identity The popular weed killer atrazine strips male frogs of a key hormone and turns them into hermaphrodites10 .
Male mice experience two spikes in hormone production in their lifetime .
Developmental Testing In Vitro The fetal testes begin to produce testosterone 11 or 12 days after conception , and continue to do so until 4 or 5 days after birth .
However , androgens from male littermates in the womb can diffuse into their sisters' bloodstreams and influence their development ( bottom ) .
In vitro techniques evaluate the three components of developmental toxicity : maternal toxicity , embryo toxicity and abnormal development .
However , these tests have not gained wide acceptance because validation work has not been performed .
A difficulty with the design of new tests is that the process of embryo development , which involves proliferation , apoptosis and differentiation together , is not well understood at the basic level .
Agents under Investigation Agents and Substances Reviewed for Reproductive Health Effects by the Office of Technology Assessment from Chemical Exposures and Toxic Responses 12-2 12.16.4 .
Congenital defects and work in pregnancy .
Dark Remedy : the impact of thalidomide and its revival as a vital medicine .
Chromosome analysis of blastomeres from human embryos by using comparative genomic hybridization .
Semen quality after prenatal exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls and dibenzofurans .
Risk of adverse birth outcomes in populations living near landfill sites .
Hermaphroditic , demasculinized frogs after exposure to the herbicide atrazine at low ecologically relevant doses .
Medulloblastoma Growth Inhibition by Hedgehog Pathway Blockade .
Increased Concentrations of Polychlorinated Biphenyls , Hexachlorobenzene , and Chlordanes in Mothers of Men with Testicular Cancer .
Food and Drug Administration Advisory Committee on Protocols for Safety Evaluation .
Panel on reproduction studies in the safety evaluation of food additives and pesticide residues .
Phthalate Exposure and Human Semen Parameters .
Bisphenol A exposure causes meiotic aneuploidy in the female mouse .
Cadmium mimics the in vivo effects of estrogen in the uterus and mammary gland .
The Association between Asthma and Allergic Symptoms in Children and Phthalates in House Dust : A Nested CaseControl Study .
and lung as a source for transplantation : Optimal organogenesis without teratoma depends on distinct time windows .
In utero alcohol exposure increases mammary tumorigenesis in rats .
Germline stem cells and follicular renewal in the postnatal mammalian ovary .
Effects of high maternal cortisol levels in early pregnancy in sheep .
The Estrogenic Effect of Bisphenol A disrupts Pancreatic β-Cell Function In Vivo and Induces Insulin Resistance .
Decrease in Anogenital Distance among Male Infants with Prenatal Phthalate Exposure .
Evidence of altered brain sexual differentiation in mice exposed perinatally to low , environmentally relevant levels of bisphenol A. Rubin BS et al .
Concentrations of urinary phthalate metabolites are associated with increased waist circumference and insulin resistance in adult u.s .
Maternal exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons diminishes murine ovarian reserve via induction of Harakiri .
Dioxin Exposure , from Infancy through Puberty , Produces Endocrine Disruption and Affects Human Semen Quality .
Epigenetic Transgenerational Actions of Endocrine Disruptors .
Consequences of paternal cocaine exposure in mice .
Epigenetic Transgenerational Actions of Endocrine Disruptors .
Prenatal PCB exposures in Eastern Slovakia modify effects of social factors on birthweight .
Use of laptop computers connected to internet through Wi-Fi decreases human sperm motility and increases sperm DNA fragmentation .
Relationship between sperm ATP content and motility of carp spermatozoa .
Transgenerational inheritance of increased fat depot size , stem cell reprogramming and hepatic steatosis elicited by prenatal exposure to the obesogen tributyltin in mice .
Mutagenesis in Somatic and Germ Cells .
The importance of genetics in the contemporary scientific literature is overplayed , because the field of genetics is young and dynamic .
Genes probably have the same importance in living systems that libraries have in society .
Individual humans are very similar at the genomic level .
One famous noncoding RNA , XIST , acts to shut down one of the X chromosomes in females .
Perhaps this reflects the limits of our understanding of genetics .
Some believe that part of the unexpressed code is involved in the management of embryonic development 8 .
Some other segments may control the expression of protein through microRNAs .
Still , other unexpressed parts could contain hidden genetic diversity that can erupt from within when conditions change , giving the organism a genetic reserve12 .
Some introns could be functional spacers or inevitable junk left from the processes by which genomes evolve .
Since 8 % of the human genome consists of DNA of viral origin , could viruses be viewed as agents of human evolution ?
13-2 Genetics has until now concentrated on the structural aspects as opposed to the functional aspects of genes , because structure can be observed more easily .
But DNA should not be thought of as a static structure .
Genetic code evolves from mutations and from the genetic variations associated with reproduction , but there are other mechanisms of spontaneous genetic evolution .
Genetic Homogeneity of Organisms Even healthy people have large gains or losses of DNA .
Genomic mechanisms may actually predispose us to such changes .
Since each gene can code for more than one protein , 200,000 to 500,000 different proteins are expected .
Post-translational modifications to proteins such as acetylation , glycosylation and phosphorylation can also increase the number of distinct structures .
In addition , genomics does not obviously reflect that in order to carry out their cellular roles , many proteins rely on interactions with other proteins or on the formation of complexes .
Single organisms can also express more than one genotype .
But how is it possible to inactivate the same X chromosome ( of the two available ) in all cells of the body ?
In human females , this was confirmed by variations in the expression of the G6PD gene ( responsible for breaking down of sugars in erythrocytes , in particular ) .
Mosaicism can be observed by eye in some species when pigmentation is X-chromosome-based .
Working Structure of Genes Most of the time , in most cells of the body , 90 % of genes are silenced by histone structures , locked away within the compacted but orderly material that makes up chromosomes .
The unicellular ciliates have two types of nuclei in the same cell .
A larger one is copied from the small one , but containing only the 27,000 working genes of the genome , the exons , which code for protein .
The introns are absent from this macronucleus .
Such sophisticated mechanisms to protect the genome are not present in humans .
As if females did not have enough genetic diversity , it has been recently recognized that females often harbor cells from 13-3 their mothers , as well as from their children ( whether they are males or female ) , possibly adding to immune system confusion in females .
Some XY crossing over occurs during male meiosis , but 95 % of the Y chromosome is on its own , having no code with which to recombine .
It is believed that men and women have distinctive dopamine-regulating systems , perhaps explaining partially psychological differences between the sexes .
Chromosome numbers in human cells grown in culture .
Mutations occur when the DNA alterations propagate in subsequent generations of cells .
These irregularities can be caused by defects in the architecture of the mitotic apparatus , which controls the migration of chromosomes to daughter cells .
Using transformed Chinese Hamster Embryo cells , it was shown5 that the number of genes altered at a rate of more than 3 % per cell division .
It therefore seems that cancer cells have the ability to spontaneously generate genetic variants .
Genetic Homogeneity among Cells In normal cells in vivo , the chromosome number is though to be relatively constant , although in certain tissues such as the liver , many cells have two nuclei , and some of the nuclei are tetraploid .
When the genome is altered , the cell has a high 13-4 The genetic variations are not limited to chromosome numbers .
F13.3 shows an extremely high rate of translocations in cancer cells using the technique called spectral karyotyping .
This method allows the coloring of chromosomes in individual colors using a combination of fluorescent dyes .
It is believed that this genetic variability may enhance the survivability of tumors in the face of environmental changes , including chemotherapy .
Chromosome Nomenclature The banding pattern of chromosomes is developed using dyes : Quinacrine or Giemsa are frequently used .
The high rate of translocations is indicated by mixed color on the same chromosome .
There are simple laboratory techniques to achieve this ( F13.4 ) using white blood cells from the blood .
Further , molecular probes can be mixed with DNA homogenates , attached fluorescent labels becoming visible when bound to matching DNA segments .
Because each probe only covers a short DNA segment , a large number of probes is needed for detailed recognition of genetic state .
Evolution put in place mechanisms to stabilize genes and improve the fidelity of genetic inheritance : double-stranded DNA as opposed to the older singlestranded RNA , error-checking by DNA polymerase : excision and recombination repair , and bi-parental inheritance ( sex ) to provided genetic diversity within meiosis ( a method of shuffling genes ) without the need for high rates of mutation .
There is a correlation between genome size and cell size among various species .
“ Synonymous ” codons may not be completely equivalent : the choice on one over the other may relate to how common the matching transfer RNA is .
If the transfer RNA is rare , the transcription of the codon will be slowed .
Synonymous C3435T codons are associated with above or below average effectiveness in pumping toxicants out of cells .
Natural selection would favor a genetic code that includes fault tolerance , that is , information can still be accurately recovered in case of error .
You will note in T13.9 that similar amino acid names ( in blue ) are clustered , so that the third base is often irrelevant : the same amino acid is coded in spite of third base changes .
Translation Code of Bases to Amino Acids Second Base U C A G UUU Phe UCU Ser UAU Tyr UGU Cys UUC Phe UCC Ser UAC Tyr UGC Cys UUA Leu UCA Ser UAA STOP UGA STOP UUG Leu UCG Ser UAG STOP UGG Trp CUU Leu CCU Pro CAU His CGU Arg CUC Leu CCC Pro CAC His CGC Arg CUA Leu CCA Pro CAA Gln CGA Arg CUG Leu CCG Pro CAG Gln CGG Arg AUU Ile ACU Thr AAU Asn AGU Ser AUC Ile ACC Thr AAC Asn AGC Ser AUA Ile ACA Thr AAA Lys AGA Arg AUG Met ACG Thr AAG Lys AGG Arg Third Base U C A G U C A G U C A G or START G GUU Val GUC Val GUA Val GUG Val GCU Ala GCC Ala GCA Ala GCG Ala GAU Asp GAC Asp GAA Glu GAG Glu GGU Gly GGC Gly GGA Gly GGG Gly U C A G Phenylalanine , Leucine , Isoleucine , Methionine , Valine , Serine , Proline , Threonine , Alanine , Tyrosine , Histidine , Glycine , Asparagine , Lysine , Aspartic acid , Glutamic acid , Cysteine , Tryptophan , Arginine , Serine , Arginine , Glycine .
If we look at the genetic code in detail , we find that whenever a single coding change does NOT yield the same amino acid , it still has a good chance of coding for one with similar hydrophobicity .
All the codons with a middle U correspond to hydrophobic amino acids , which is critical in determining how the protein folds .
Nature “ knows ” from evolution that level of hydrophobicity is critical , even at the most basic level : at least 2/3 of the time , a 13-7 point mutation will either leave the amino acid unchanged or substitute another similarly hydrophobic amino acid .
The genetic code itself is designed to protect hydrophobicity information .
The genetic code is optimized to conserve hydrophobicity specification , well ahead of other variables , such as electric charge11 .
If the wrong base is inserted by the molecular machinery ( T13.10 , top ) in the process of copying DNA , errors in protein can result .
Some toxicants , like hydroxyurea , can produce errors by producing an imbalance in the pool of intracellular DNA precursors .
Not all mutations have equivalent effects .
T13.10 illustrates various examples of base mutations and their effects on the coded protein .
Changes in the coding of a protein may have consequences on the secondary or tertiary structure of a protein , or not at all .
It is presumed that molecules that interact with many others have a more critical structure .
But the normal copying , maintenance and transcription of DNA is a fallible process , due to endogenous damaging agents , including metabolites acting as alkylating agents and the ROS ( Reactive Oxygen Species ) that arise during respiration .
About ten thousand DNA lesions per day per cell are spontaneously produced.Although most of the genetic code in made of non-coding introns , consequential alterations to the code are still frequent .
Accurate mutation rates for specific mutations are available from epidemiology .
Amino Acid alterations from Codon mutations .
Ser Met Ala Frameshift with UUU UAA GUA UGG CUA nonsense Phe Stop Alterations : Codon Insertion ( of GUU ) or Deletion ( of AAG ) UUU AAG UAU GGC GUU Insertion Phe Lys Tyr Gly Val UUU UAU GGC UAA Deletion Phe Tyr Gly Stop The mutations , if not lethal , will be reproduced in downstream cells .
Such DNA alterations can give rise to congenital anomalies .
Environmental DNA-damaging agents include UV light and ionizing radiation , as well as a variety of toxicants encountered in foodstuffs , air and water .
Electrophyllic molecules in their native form , or from bio-transformation are the most frequent cause of damage .
Free radicals and activated molecules result from intoxication as well as normal metabolism .
Due to Toxicants In some cases , the exact site of mutations on the DNA is known for specific toxicants , as shown in the following table .
The effects of selected physical and chemical mutagens .
Toxic Chemicals Reaction Sites on DNA .
DNA Protection Exposure to various agents may result in diverse , structurally heterogeneous adducts being added to DNA .
In this case , the structure of DNA is altered by the covalent addition of molecular species .
Many lesions to DNA and other living tissues can be attenuated using antioxidants .
In the case of this drug , it is believed that it is present in normal cells at a concentration 100 times higher than in cancer cells .
Many of these compounds tend to concentrate in the mitochondria and in the nucleus .
Methylation patterns are heritable from generation to generation , and are tissue specific .
Modulation within tissues is accomplished by the action of demethylases .
DNA Repair The process of thymidine dimer repair can be stimulated by skin application of thymidine dinucleotide , a DNA snippet of just two nucleotides .
DNA Repair Mechanisms There are more than 100 genes in our genome devoted to detecting and repairing DNA damage .
DNA repair enzymes continuously monitor chromosomes to correct damaged nucleotide residues .
Failure to repair DNA lesions may result in blockages of transcription and replication , mutagenesis , and cellular cytotoxicity .
For example , in excision repair , thymidine dimers which can be formed by UV exposure are repaired by excision , followed by -polymerase and finally by DNA ligase which seals the gap .
One of the best known mechanisms known to lead to cancer is damage to the p53 gene and consequently to the supply of p53 protein .
The p53 gene is normally silent , but is turned on by DNA damage .
Individuals are extremely sensitive to sunlight and usually die early of some form of cancer .
There is a continuous competition between DNA mutation and repair in living organisms .
The modification of hematopoietic stem cells by bone marrow transplant allows the stable genetic modification of an entire organ , the blood .
In the case of mutation of somatic cells , one cell , and eventually one tissue , and finally the organism can be affected ( tumor ) .
Mutagenesis in Somatic and Germ Cells The whole organism is mutated ( all tissues ) .
Mutation can also occur at the blastocyst stage in the course of gestation , affecting part of the cells of an organism .
Later , they migrate back into the location in the embryo where the sex organs will form .
Germinal mutation change from the original parental code which is passed on to the organism 's offspring .
Somatic mutation is a change from the original parental code which is passed on to the cell 's offspring .
Consequences of Mutagenic Events F13.16 shows the scenarios resulting from mutations .
There may be changes in the number of chromosomes , chromosome breakages ( shortened or lengthened ) , including exchanges between segments of chromosomes ( which may not lead to functional trouble ) , and micro lesions : code mutations where the base-pairs are altered .
Note : the term clastogen refers to a chemical with the ability to break chromosomes apart .
Generally , any free radical has an unpaired electron with the ability to create chemical instability .
This instability is well correlated with mutagenic and carcinogenic potency .
MUTATIONS IN GERM CELLS Genetic Disease or Condition Dyslexia Manic depression Schizophrenia Juvenile diabetes Adult polycystic kidney disease disease Familial Alzheimer's Multiple sclerosis AAT deficiency ( emphysema ) Myotonic muscular dystrophy Fragile X chromosome syndrome Sickle cell anemia Duchenne muscular dystrophy Cystic fibrosis Huntington 's chorea Hemophilia Phenylketonuria Retinoblastoma ( childhood eye cancer ) F13.16 .
Macro-Lesions Those are large scale changes in chromosome number or structure .
Many cancer cells thought to have a normal genotype have in fact genes where large parts have been recombined .
There is intimate twisting of homologous chromosomes in meiosis .
When something goes wrong , the fertilized egg often dies .
In Normal Reproduction Meiosis , in which the number of chromosomes is halved , involves a random distribution of chromosomes pairs into zygotes , as well as recombination between chromosome pairs ( 223 possibilities among whole chromosome combinations 13.11.1.2 .
In Abnormal Reproduction Cell nuclei with altered chromosome numbers can be polyploid or aneuploid .
 Recombination between chromosome pairs allows segments of maternal and paternal chromosomes to be exchanged .
Polyploidy Polyploidies ( = many copies of all genes ) that are possible in humans are triploid and tetraploid .
Straight hair , flattened face , open mouth with large tongue , upward slanting eyes with epicanthal folds .
Breaks and most deletions are lethal .
Anomalies are also possible in the sex chromosomes .
Rearrangements are part of the normal process of meiosis , and are often not deleterious , since no genetic material is lost .
Changes in the normal number of single chromosomes .
Testicular feminization is an X-chromosomelinked recessive disorder which causes XY individuals to develop into phenotypic ( very attractive ) females because of insensitivity to testosterone : they have a defective nuclear testosterone receptor .
Subjects usually have testes hidden in the inguinal region , lack pubic hair and do not menstruate .
Most of these mutations are recessive .
The rates of the small mutations can be used as a clock to analyze evolutionary divergence in the chromosomes of cells or mitochondria ( where the mutation rate is higher ) .
The term methylation refers to the addition of a methyl group to the cyclic carbon 5 of a cytosine nucleotide .
Basically , the methyl group tags a gene so it is turned off , and an unnecessary protein product is not produced in a particular cell .
For instance , one of the two X chromosomes in female mammals is inactivated by methylation .
 Generally , receptors for water-soluble substances are on the cell membrane , whereas receptors for fat-soluble substances are in the cytosol or in the nuclear membrane .
The mutation alters the coding of a functional part of a cell receptor for chlorine in lung tissue .
The presence of a deleterious recessive mutation would be detected as an increased rate of disease from an agent affecting the dominant gene .
Because of this mechanism , there is potential for an unrecognized degeneration of the gene pool from apparently inoffensive toxicants .
Preservation of the genome depends on our understanding of it .
Because exons are actually expressed , at least some of their mutations would be detected .
Since introns are processed out , how do we detect mutations in introns , and can we guarantee that they have no subtle role in species-level health ?
Is the redundancy of the genetic code a true redundancy ?
If we have difficulties quantifying the effects of one agent , how good are we at detecting the effects of agent combinations , which appears necessary to detect recessive mutations ?
While it would seem like a good idea in medical therapy to correct genetic deficiencies in subjects by inserting the correct gene and deleting the bad one , the cells of the body are not as easily accessible as the code on a computer hard disk .
Although we have been successful at reading the genome , effectively fixing it in adults has remained a difficult problem .
Viral vectors or electroporation techniques for achieving this delivery have various problems .
Until now , very modest successes have been possible correcting genetic diseases in tissues of the body that proliferate continuously .
Unexpected results have been frequent in the few attempts made at genetic therapy .
Mutagenicity Testing In vivo toxicity experiments often pinpoint the target organ , but not the mechanism by which the agent produces the effect .
Risks of Recessive Mutations Recessive mutations pose the greatest risk and are of the greatest concern to geneticists .
Redundancy in safety systems poses a problem if there is no warning of its loss .
They will only be detected when some other agent produces a dominant gene function loss or when an individual becomes homozygous for the recessive trait .
Hemophilia , color-blindness and hereditary baldness are all caused by recessive alleles on the X chromosome , of which there are two in women but only one in men .
This means that an agent producing recessive mutations on X in women could only be uncovered by testing in combination with another agent capable of disabling the dominant gene or by insuring that test subjects are homozygous for that gene ( the same is In vitro models that are fast and inexpensive have become dominant in mutagenicity testing ( T13.26 ) .
Even when animals are used for mutagenicity testing , the detection procedure is generally performed in vitro , excluding only the exposure segment .
Two large classes of models are available : cells without nuclei and cells who have them .
Cells without nuclei are inherently more vulnerable to attack because their 13-16 Gonick , 1991 genes are not segregated in a nucleus , and also because they are not diploid .
Furthermore , the bacteria used in genotoxicity tests carry an rfa mutation leading to a defective polysaccharide coat , making the cells more permeable to large molecules .
Even further , the uvrB mutation impairs DNA repair by excision .
hours , by which time any colonies are visible to the eye .
The rapid rate of cell division typical of bacteria is good for the test , since the DNA is then most vulnerable .
The mutant organism , supported by the inclusion of a complete nutrient , is mixed with the test agent , incubated , and then decanted onto an agar plate which contains only a minute amount of the nutrient ( to get growth started ) .
Continued growth and the development of visible colonies will require that the test agent be mutagenic , causing some reaction with the DNA to result in a reversal of the genetic material back to a '' wild-type '' organism .
Forward mutations present a larger genetic target for the chemical , with mutations occurring at several loci within one gene or being spread over several genes .
It has been know for a long time ( the work of Beadle and Tatum ) that mutants of molds , for example , develop nutritional dependencies after being mutated .
Ames developed a bacterial test systems using mutant organisms with a highly specific defect in a genetic locus , which can not grow unless some vital nutrient ( amino acid , sugar ) is included in the growth medium .
When the vital nutrient is deliberately withheld from the medium , the test organism can not grow .
Ames Test ( prokaryotes in vitro ) The Ames Test was the forerunner in this field , using a number of mutants of Salmonella typhimurium that were usually defective for histidine .
Although some substances that cause cancer in laboratory animals ( dioxin , for example ) do not give a positive Ames test ( and vice-versa ) , the ease and low cost of the test make it invaluable for carcinogenicity screening .
repair gene uvrB and addition of genes that enhance UV and chemical mutagenesis .
The low rate of spontaneous reversion and the high rate of chemically induced reversion seen with the test strain make this assay the industry standard for assessing genotoxicity .
The bacterium used in the test is a strain of Salmonella typhimurium that caries a defective ( mutant ) gene making it unable to synthesize the amino acid histidine ( his ) from the ingredients in its culture medium .
These revertants are able to grow on a medium lacking histidine .
Problems of the Ames Test ( 1 ) Not all mutagens cause mutations in the test , since some require biotransformation into active intermediates .
This difficulty is overcome by the inclusion of rodent liver homogenate ( “ S9 ” ) to provide the necessary enzymes during incubation to activate promutagenic agents to mutagens .
The homogenate is however toxic , so that such tests can not be done long-term .
A suspension of a histidinerequiring his- strain of Salmonella typhimurium has been plated with a mixture of rat liver enzymes on agar lacking histidine .
The Ames Test is actually a test of mutagenic action on bacteria , rather than carcinogenicity .
When many chemicals with a good safety record , synthetic and natural , are tested , many record positive in the Ames test .
This proves that bacteria are exceptionally sensitive to chemicals .
Decisions for the further evaluation of a chemical rest on the outcome of the results of these numerous tests .
from exposed individuals and incorporate it into the standard Ames Test 2 .
The mutagenic effect of the chemical has caused many bacteria to regain the ability to grow without histidine , forming the his+ colonies seen around the white disk .
The scattered colonies near the margin of the disk represent spontaneous revertants .
The strain contains a number of other alterations that dispose it to mutagenesis studies , including a deletion in the excision 13-18 Imprinting present in an animal or human can be erased by various procedures , leading to changing characteristics or even abnormalities .
But cell culture corrupts imprinting , especially over time , because cultured cells optimize themselves to survive under culture conditions , leading to alterations in their epi-genetic features .
Foods found to have Mutagenic Components in the Ames Assay Coffee Tea Broiled beef and pork Broiled fish Pickled vegetables ( Japanese ) Flavonoids in many edible plants Mushrooms ( Agaricus bisporus ) Salted fish ( Chinese ) Caramelized sugars ( glucose / fructose ) Pyrolysates of onion and garlic Aflatoxin and other mycotoxins ( food contamination ) Safrole The endpoints measured for mutation vary considerably and these tests are used extensively : DNA damage/repair assays , unscheduled DNA synthesis , enzymatic changes , morphological aberrations ( sister chromatid exchanges , micronucleus formation , chromosomal breaks - clastogenesis ) .
As cells continue to grow in the presence of the agent , breakages in the chromosome may occur and be repaired by cellular machinery .
But because of the marking , the fixes will be visible as harlequin chromosomes .
Testing with Eukaryotic Cells Bacterial metabolism and human metabolism are not the same , so investigators began to use mammalian and human cells for testing .
Some of these cells are capable of biotransformation of the agent , eliminating the need for agent activation by rodent liver homogenates .
Although one can usually obtain and grow cells of human origin in vitro for the purposes of experimentation , the process of cell culture itself may not allow transmission of essential characteristics .
By DNA methylation or acetylation of histones , genes can be imprinted for suppression or expression .
Erasure of imprinting is normal in conception ( but may not be total ) , where the imprints of gametes are lost and then re-established .
This also happens in the adult body , where maternal or paternal alleles are suppressed , affecting the nature and amount of protein produced by cells .
The number of epigenetic differences in 50-year old twins is more than triple that in 3year old twins .
Study of the length of these tails is indicative of DNA damage .
The comet assay is exquisitely sensitive to the detection of DNA damage in individual cells , and it is becoming an influential tool in the measurement of genotoxicity .
It was used initially to assess sulfuric acid-potassium permanganate mixtures in coordination with the Ames test .
Applications followed with the insecticide lindane , organic mercury compounds , l-chloro-methyl-pyrene , as well as documenting the antigenotoxic activities of lactic acid bacteria .
During cell division , the genetic material should spread equally between the two daughter cells .
If chromosomes are broken , pieces of chromosomes or whole chromosomes may fail to be included in either of the two daughter nuclei because they lack a centromere and are not pulled to the appropriate pole of the spindle .
If a treated group of animals shows significantly higher frequencies of micronucleated cells than do the untreated control animals , then the chemical is considered to be capable of inducing chromosomal damage3 .
This test , also called the single cell gel assay , is a very important alternative to the cytogenetic tests .
It is less labour intensive , more rapid and less expensive .
There are no restrictions on the source of the cells , which cells may be exposed either in vivo or in vitro .
Once on the slide , the lysed cells are subjected to electrophoresis in neutral or basic medium .
The pH , which influences the level of DNA uncoiling , determines in part whether single strand or double-strand DNA breaks are detected by the method .
The nuclear material can be stained after electrophoresis , and breaks in DNA appear graphically as a tail from the round location of the nucleus , thus the name The test is able to provide information on individual cells and both on damage to DNA and on alteration of the ability of cells to repair DNA .
Genetic MicroArray Testing Genetic MicroArrays can be used to assess cellular responses to ionizing radiation , for example , and may be used to determine individual genetic sensitivity to radiation in the future .
It is known from micronuclei formation in T lymphocytes that individuals vary 13-20 in their responses , probably because of variations in DNA repair mechanisms .
The conclusion is that radiation response at low doses is quite specific and different from that obtained at high doses .
Cancer and Mutation It is generally assumed that genotoxicity underlies carcinogenicity , and this is mostly true .
However , because organisms have DNA repair mechanisms as well as cell population management mechanisms , actual causes of carcinogenicity can be quite complex .
This is why tumors often take some time to appear , together with the fact that they need some time to grow .
Compound Established Human Carcinogen Bacteria Yeast Drosophila Mammalian Cells Human Cells T13.32 .
An example illustrating the link between cancer and DNA damage comes from lung cancer .
Test Batteries in Mutagenic Testing With many genotoxicity methods available in many models , the results do not always corroborate one another ( T13.32 ) .
There are specific mechanisms known to lead to cancer .
One of the best known is damage to the p53 gene and consequently to the supply of p53 protein .
The p53 gene is normally silent , but is turned on by DNA damage .
If the repairs are not successful , it can also induce apoptosis .
Apoptosis F13.34 Processes of Cell Death Necrosis : the process of elimination of dead material .
Apoptosis : programmed cell death in which caspases are activated and apoptosomes are formed .
Can be triggered by withholding an hormone or protein on which the cell has become dependant .
Can be triggered by oxidative attack .
Oncosis : cell swells to death from oxygen starvation , ATP depletion , excess sodium and water , protein denaturation and intracellular calcium excess .
However , the path to cancer can be more complex than a specific mutation , and can involve more indirect mechanisms ( such as promotion ) based on normal physiological maintenance .
Known Human Carcinogens Aflatoxins Arsenic and ar.compounds Asbestos Azathioprine Benzene Benzidine Beryllium Cadmium compounds Chromium [ VI ] compounds Cyclophosphamide Diethylstilbestrol Ethylene oxide Formaldehyde Gallium arsenide Vinvl chloride Mutagen Yes No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Suspected Human Carcinogens Acrylamide Benz [ a ] anthracene Benzidine-based dyes Benzo [ a ] pyrene Carbazole Chlordane Ethylene dibromide Glycidol Lead Styrene-7 , S-oxide Tetrachloroethylene Benzofuran Tris ( 2,3-dibromopropyl ) phosphate Vinyl bromide Vinvl fluoride Mutagen Yes Yes Yes Yes No No Yes No Short-term death in cells ( F13.34 ) can result from necrosis or apoptosis , an endogenous death mechanism .
Whether cells die by one mechanism or the other often depends on how quick and severe the damage is .
Apoptosis is predictive of epigenetic carcinogenicity .
Both activate a family of Cys ( Cysteine ) Proteases , named Caspases that act in a proteolytic cascade to dismantle and remove the dying cell .
Yes No No No No Yes Yes 13-22 One of the extrinsic pathways is the the stimulation of tumor necrosis factor receptors such as CD95 ( or Fas ) .
This leads to activation of the p53 gene , which triggers decay of the mitochondria .
Many human cancers have been found to have alterations to p53 .
p53 knockout mice are used as an animal model to assess recessive mutations .
In The Basis of Toxicity Testing .
Mutagens in urine samples repetitively from municipal refuse incinerator workers and water treatment workers .
Cytogenetic analysis of a human population occupationally exposed to pesticides .
Sister chromatid exchanges in lymphocytes of petroleum retailers .
Genetic instability of cancer cells is proportional to their degree of aneuploidy .
Imaging genome abnormalities in cancer research .
DNA repair activity for oxidative damage and risk of lung cancer .
Retrotransposons regulate host genes in mouse oocytes and preimplantation embryos .
An Atlas of Combinatorial Transcriptional Regulation in Mouse and Man .
Apoptosis is important in many cases of chronic toxicity if the dissolved cells are not completely replaced .
On the other hand , caloric deprivation slows aging by activating sirtuins , a family of deacetylase enzymes that reduce apoptosis by protecting cells against reactive oxygen species and DNA damage .
The rate of replacement is enhanced by nutrient deprivation and glucagon .
In 1914 Theodor Boveri wrote that cancer cells could be distinguished from normal ones in that they had abnormal numbers of chromosomes ( see inset at left ) .
Cells can actually sometimes be cancerous without being aneuploid .
The leading hypothesis on the nature of cancer suggests that a variety of gene changes can induce genetic instability , and that subsequent changes result in cancer , that frequently show aneuploidy .
Given a system as complex as the genome , the “ normal ” cells of the body may be more remarkable than the cancer cells .
To a point , stable genomes sacrifice adaptability and variability , a hallmark of bacteria , for the benefit of building coherent multicellular organisms , presumably an advantage to establish immunity .
Cancer itself is enormously complex , even if all tumors share some characteristics in common : runaway cell division and hypoxia .
It would be expected that different cancer types show different genetic changes , but it is more surprising that even among people diagnosed with the same type of cancer , there are individual patterns of genetic changes .
Therapies for cancer would gain from being highly individualized .
Molecular Basis Although the environment can be controlled to reduce cancer rates , there will probably always be a basal cancer rate resulting from genetic structure .
This basal cancer rate can only be changed by altering the genome itself towards increased stability .
Therefore , cancer is a disease that needs to be fought ongoingly in species that show genomic adaptability .
Ames has shown the deficiencies in vitamins B12 , B6 or folic acid ( shown in sequence ) cause replicating DNA to incorporate uracil instead of thymine .
When two such events occur closely on opposite strands , repair can yield doublestranded nicks which break chromosomes , causing cancer 5 .
Stopping myc manufacture causes the cancer cells to differentiate back into apparently normal liver cells .
However , their cancerous character can be reawakened by the return of myc synthesis7 .
The retinoblastoma protein , for example , is central to the process of cell proliferation , activating the genes for cell division .
An interesting property of this protein is that it is active in a wide variety of cellular processes , and interacts with more than 100 other proteins .
Several viruses have been linked to cancer .
In rare cases in animals ( canine transmissible venereal sarcoma ) , it can even be transmitted through cell exchange .
Environmental Cause of Cancer Cancer is feared .
Information that a chemical causes cancer sets the media into a frenzy of reporting to avid readers or listeners , and governments into regulatory responses .
For example , a statement many years ago by John Higginson that 80 % of all cancers could be attributed to the '' environment '' was interpreted by the press and the reading public to mean that things outside their control were the root causes of cancer .
This statement is supported by international observations on cancer incidence in migrants .
Indoor smoke from coal Contaminated injections from health care 2 .
9. passage of time , or in succeeding generations , rates tend to approach those of the native-born in the country of adoption , pointing to the importance of environmentally determined hormonal or dietary causes .
Some controllable causes of cancer are smoking and drinking alcohol .
The enzyme also activates procarcinogens such as nitrosamines .
Genetic variants of the CYP 2E1 gene were previously reported to be risk factors for various cancers .
It is estimated that 30 % of cancers could be eliminated through dietary intervention .
childhood eye cancer arising from immature cells in the retina .
Occupational Causes of Cancer Despite efforts at controlling exposure to carcinogens , occupational cancer is still prevalent among the workforce , particularly in the older individuals whose exposure predated many regulations lowering the toxicant levels .
Subjects were usually in their early 20s and had been employed as young boys to climb up into large chimneys and scrape down the accumulated hydrocarbons ( polycyclic aromatics , PAHs ) , metals ( lead , arsenic ) , and carbon .
Potts was busily removing diseased testicles from these people .
Their scrotal cancer related to soot from the soft coal burned in the fireplaces .
The scrotum is an area where chemicals can be efficiently absorbed .
Metals Causing Human Cancer Arsenic Cu refinery Pulmonary carcinoma As pesticides Lymphoma , leukemia Chemical plants Dermal carcinoma Drinking water ( oral ) Hepatic angiosarcoma Cigarette smoke Cadmium Cd refinery Pulmonary carcinoma , Prostatic carcinoma Chromium Cr refinery Pulmonary carcinoma Chrome plating , Chromate pigments Gastrointestinal carcinoma Nickel Pulmonary carcinoma , Nasolaryngeal carcinoma , Ni refinery Gastric and renal carcinoma , Sarcoma ( ? ) .
Metals causing Animal Cancers METALS ANIMALS TUMOR SITE ROUTE Mice , rats , Osteosarcoma Bone Beryllium IV , INH monkeys Carcinoma Lung Mice , rats , Sarcoma Injection site Cadmium IM , SC , ITS chickens Teratoma Testes Cobalt Rats , rabbits Sarcoma Injection site IM , SC Mice , rats , Sarcoma Injection site IM , SC , IP , Chromium rabbits Carcinoma Lung INH Hamsters , mice , Iron Sarcoma Injection site IM , IP , SC rats , rabbits Mice , rats , cats , Sarcoma Injection site hamsters , IM , ITS , SC Nickel Carcinoma Lung rabbits Guinea INH , IP , IR Carcinoma Kidney pigs , rats Lead Mice , rats Carcinoma Kidney IP , PO , SC Titanium Rats Sarcoma Injection site IM Chickens , rats , Carcinoma Testes Zinc ITS hamsters Teratoma Testes 14.2 .
Increased incidence of scrotal cancer among chimney sweeps .
Scrotal cancer in smelters due to arsenic .
Bladder cancer due to aromatic amines .
Mutagenesis and Somatic Mutation Theory suggests that cancer is related to chromosome abnormalities and alteration in genetic material .
First Animal Data : multiple applications of coal tar to rabbit ears produces skin carcinomas .
Isolation of single cell clones from a tumor and finding that injection of these cells into a healthy host reproduces the disease , demonstrating that cancer is a stable , heritable cellular alteration .
Radium brushes and lip cancer in dial painters .
Animal experiments and occupational workers exposed to benzene , chromates , tars , coal-tar dye intermediates , radiation and asbestos were the first to associate substance use with cancer .
D E 1 Carcinogens are recognized by their ability to create tumors because diagnosing cancer from blood tests is unreliable , largely due to the fact that the malignant phenotype is derived from normal cellular functions .
Of course , by the time a cancer produces clinical symptoms , the window of curative possibilities has largely passed .
The operational definition of a carcinogen refers to changing “ the tumor incidence normally observed ” because the incidence of tumors in humans and in animal models is not zero , even under the best conditions ( T14.5 ) .
To adequately detect changes in tumor incidence , the species should not have a natural rate that is too low or too high , to insure sensitivity and specificity .
2A International Agency for Research on Cancer ( IARC ) 2B 3 4 Description Sufficient evidence from epidemiologic studies to support a causal association Limited evidence in humans from epidemiologic studies Sufficient evidence from animal studies but limited evidence in humans Limited or equivocal evidence from animal studies and inadequate or no data in humans Inadequate evidence in animals No evidence of carcinogenicity in at least two adequate animal tests in different species Sufficient epidemiological evidence for carcinogenicity in humans Probably carcinogenic in humans based on limited evidence in humans and sufficient evidence in animals Possibly carcinogenic in humans based on sufficient evidence in animals but inadequate evidence in humans or limited evidence in humans with insufficient evidence in animals Not classifiable Not carcinogenic For evidence of carcinogenicity , production of benign neoplasms is accepted , as no chemical has been found that produces them exclusively .
Regulatory agencies ( IARC ) accept that benign neoplasms represent the first stage of the cancer process .
These ratings are mentioned in the MSDS sheets .
If cancer is avoided , it is rather unlikely that other toxicities will occur .
Cumulative Risk of Death from Cancer for Rat and Human .
Reliance must then be placed on the weight and strength of animal studies .
The courts are not terribly sophisticated in their approach to science , so they tend to bias strongly the acceptable evidence for causation of cancer on epidemiology .
Researchers and regulators , by contrast , frequently make judgments from animal or in vitro experiments .
Nearly 50 % of probable human carcinogens and a few know human carcinogens are considered such by IARC without epidemiological evidence ( based on animal and in vitro studies ) .
Agencies such as the U.S. EPA or the International Agency for Research on Cancer ( IARC ) in Lyon , France , have developed lists of carcinogens , but not all agencies list the same chemicals .
See the lists of recognized and suspected carcinogens at the end of this chapter .
Lists of recognized and suspected carcinogens found in the workplace are given in T14.8-9 .
Carcinoma A malignant new growth of epithelial cells that gives rise to metastases .
Carcinomas tend to spread ( metastasis ) through the blood vessels , lymph channels or spinal fluid to other organs such as the bone , liver , lung or the brain .
Sarcoma An often highly malignant tumor made of tissue similar to normal `` connective tissues '' .
In spite of these broad classifications , it is probable that each patient ’ s cancer has a unique profile of genetic alterations .
Carcinogen Types Although many chemicals have shown to induce tumors in animals , remarkably few have been proven to cause cancer in humans .
Carcinogenicity is easy to prove if , as in the case of vinyl chloride , there is strong evidence from epidemiological studies of an association or causal relationship with an exceedingly rare carcinoma , angiosarcoma1 .
However , one generally encounters the situation where the human data is In the early days , a number of compounds were isolated from coal tar that could induce cancer at the point of application ( F14.11 ) .
They were polycyclic hydrocarbons , containing virtually nothing but carbon and hydrogen .
As knowledge improved , it was determined that some carcinogens needed biological activation from procarcinogen to proximate carcinogen to ultimate carcinogen ( F14.13 ) by Phase I enzymes or by conjugation ( F14.14 ) with Phase II enzymes .
 The epithelium is the covering of internal and external surfaces of the body , including the lining of vessels and other small cavities .
The epithelium also includes the skin and lining of the organs such as breast , prostate , lung , stomach or bowel .
For example , radiation can ionize DNA , as well as ionize water to produce reactive oxygen species that can alter DNA .
Inorganic Agents can generate free radicals or interfere with enzymes associated with replication of DNA , altering fidelity of replication .
Industries-Trades with Proven Excess Cancers INDUSTRIES AND PRIMARY AGENT TRADES AFFECTED SITE Para-aminodiphenyl Chemical manufacturing Urinary bladder Construction , asbestos mining and milling , production of friction products and cement Pleura , peritoneum , bronchus Arsenic Copper mining and smelting Skin , bronchus , liver Alkylating agents ( mechloro ethamine hydrochloride and bis [ chloromethyl ] ether ) Chemical manufacturing Bronchus Benzene Chemical and rubber manufacturing , petroleum refining Bone marrow Dye and textile production Urinary bladder Ethylene oxide Tanning , pigment making Nasal sinus , bronchus Cancer of paranasal sinuses Nasal sinus , bronchus Formaldehyde Asbestos Benzidine , betanaphthylamine , and derived dyes Chromium and chromates Isopropyl alcohol manufacture Nickel Polynuclear aromatic hydro-carbons from coke , coal tar , shale , mineral oils , and creosote Vinyl chloride monomer Wood dust T14.9 .
Industries and Trades with Suspected Excess Cancers Casarett and Doull .
Genotoxic , Initiator or Ultimate These carcinogens act directly on DNA to form strong covalent bonds .
INDUSTRIES AND TRADES Chemical and plastics Beryllium processing , aircraft manufacturing , electronics , secondary smelting Smelting , battery making Welding Hospitals , production of hospital supplies Plastic , textile , and chemical production ; health care SUSPECTED HUMAN SITES Lung , colon , prostate Manufacturing , insulation Bronchus Farming , herbicide application Electrical equipment production and maintenance Bronchus Bronchus Bone marrow Nasal sinus , bronchus Soft tissue sarcoma Liver Pesticide manufacture and application , agriculture Bone marrow Casting , mining refracting Bronchus 14.5.2.1.2 .
Procarcinogens Procarcinogens require biotransformation to reactive intermediates , or to proximate carcinogens capable of reacting with DNA .
Most chemical carcinogens belong to this second group .
Direct Carcinogens Direct Carcinogens are intrinsically reactive compounds that do not require metabolic activation by cellular enzymes to interact with DNA .
Epigenetic or Promoter Epigenetic or Promoter carcinogens are agents that do not alter the base sequences of DNA , but modify cell behavior by the way of non-heritable molecular modifications .
So , there are different epigenetic modifications in every tissue , and even in every person .
However , identical twins who start out with nearly identical methylation patterns grow apart epigenetically as they age .
In cancer , it is often found that protective protein have been turned off by epigenetic modifications .
Therefore , drugs such as decitabine which demythylate DNA may have a role in cancer therapy .
These components often cluster near the beginning of a gene , where protein attach to turn genes on .
So , the presence of methyl groups turns genes off .
Stimulation of proliferation Inhibition of apoptosis Cytotoxicity followed by compensatory regeneration Modification of endocrine function Immunosuppression Activation of specific receptors ( ex. , PPAR ) There are no pure promoters .
All cells types have a distinct pattern of methylation and histone modification that prepare a cell to do its specific job in the body .
As a consequence of enzyme activity , epigenetic modifications are passed down as cells divide .
Metabolic activation of carcinogenicity by Phase II enzymes .
Co-carcinogens involve hormonal action on cell proliferation , inhibition of intercellular communication and immunosuppression .
These substances favor the proliferation of cells with an altered genotype ( cells containing a mutation ) as well as proliferative and differentiated phenotypes , thereby enhancing tumor growth .
Finally , there is some predictability in carcinogenic potential of molecules which can be summarized in the ultimate carcinogenic molecule ( F14.16 ) , compacting all alterations known to favor the expression of mutagenicity .
Classical Mechanism of Tumor Formation Cancer is uncontrolled cell growth , differentiation , and development .
Metastasis Metastasis is the spread of a disease ( usually cancer ) from an original site to other parts of the body .
This usually happens when cancer cells break off from the original tumor and travel through the blood vessels to a new site .
This kind of cancer is called malignant , meaning that it is life-threatening and usually fatal .
If cells from human breast tumors that have metastasized to the lungs are injected intravenously into mice , we observe implantation of the cells into the lungs of the animals8 .
Most neoplasms show chromosomal aberrations , as the cause or result of the cancerous activity .
This suggests that carcinogenic agents interact with DNA before the carcinogenic process begins .
Promotion is probably intimately related to apoptosis , and many suppressors of apoptosis are cancer promoters .
The multistep hypothesis finds support in the existence in vitro of transformed cells .
These cells have a different appearance , survive without growth factors and do not need to be anchored to a solid support ( can grow in soft agar ) .
Most human trials monitoring cancer follow the relatively rapid development of precancerous biomarkers such as elevated concentrations of enzymes , cell changes or activation of certain genes .
In experimental animal models , carcinogenesis is divided into at least three stages : Irreversible conversion of a benign tumor to a malignant tumor .
Progression is brought about either by the activation of proto-oncogenes or by the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes .
Initiation An irreversible genotoxic event resulting in alteration of the primary sequence of DNA , rather than cell morphology .
Promoters must be administered in a sustained way to be effective .
The initiated ( mutant ) cell may remain dormant until exposed to a tumor promoter , which allows the initiated cell to expand clonally and eventually produces a tumor .
Promoters influence growth hormone production , regulate gene expression ( stimulation or suppression ) and interfere with cell differentiation ( proliferation of colonies of immature cells ) .
If a single initiating event triggered cancer , the risk would be expected to rise continuously as the radiation , for example , increased .
Any type of more intricate physiology in carcinogenesis could produce more complex curves , perhaps with breaks in the slope as one increases dose .
Dose-responses should also ideally include background cancer rates that happen spontaneously as a result of the presence of proto-oncogenes , for example .
Until recently , it was thought that in humans , four to six independent events were necessary for tumorigenesis .
It is possible to trigger cancer in the mouse with just 2 genetic changes , the addition of 2 oncogenes .
It has been possible recently to create a human cancer cell purely from genetic manipulations .
Inhibitors of telomerase can remortalize human cancer cells , ultimately leading to death of transformed human breast epithelial cells and human prostate cancer cells in culture ( Geron ) .
Telomerase activity is detectable in over 30 different human cancer types and is the primary mechanism for maintaining telomere length in human cancers .
If repeated exposures are required to manifest the carcinogenic potential of a substance , the distinction between initiator and promoter can become problematic .
Genetic View of Cancer When studied at the level of genes , one obvious characteristic is that tumors have altered numbers of chromosomes ( sidebar on page 14-2 ) .
Genetic alterations that are lethal at the level of the whole organism are acceptable if the only function of the cell is to proliferate .
Those alterations may be effects rather than causes .
Oncogenes On the other hand , certain genes are known , oncogenes , that can cause cancer when mutated or inappropriately expressed .
Whether or not an oncogene causes cancer depends on : genetic makeup and environmental variables ( vitamin deficiency or smoking habits ) .
If the oncogene is introduced in a mouse model by genetic engineering , it typically causes cancer in only a few tissues , even if the gene is expressed in all .
A protein expressed in a variety of cells may only induce cancer in some tissues , and then only at a specific times in development .
Highly specific conditions allow the cancer to develop under the influence of the protein product .
Oncogenes explain why certain strains of animals appear to have a higher than “ normal ” incidence of certain tumor types .
Probably , these animals have not only been already initiated ( cellular genome has been altered ) , but they contain oncogenes or proto-oncogenes that only require a promoting agent .
This would mean that most of the agents that we have identified as carcinogenic are actually promoters .
Tumor Suppressors Are negative regulators of cell growth .
p53 holds the record for being mutated in the largest percentage of tumors relative to any other tumor suppressor .
The complexity of suppressor biology should not be underestimated .
For example , knocking out the retinoblastoma gene in a mouse model can cause severe abnormalities and embryonic death .
But the same knockout in another mouse strain has no effect .
Cervical cancer can be induced in humans by the Human Papilloma Virus , although the induction takes a long time .
This suggests that some humans are already primed for cancer and are only waiting for the proper agent .
This would explain ethnic and regional differences in both incidence rate and type of tumor .
Consequently , aging is not an inevitable feature of all tissues or organisms .
Aging cells in the worm are constantly replaced using pluripotent stem cells9 .
Telomeres The shortening of the chromosomes ’ telomeres at each cell division ultimately prevent the cells from dividing and is believed to contribute to tissue aging , but in humans it is also observed that telomere shortening usually precedes and contributes to cancer of the prostate and pancreas .
This occurs presumably when old cells are not destroyed by apoptosis .
Cell loss as a result of apoptosis may be compensated by stem cells within a tissue .
For example , cell proliferation is a very powerful predictor of epigenetic bladder cancer .
Because of this promotion and progression physiology , tests that measure increased cell proliferation are important in carcinogenicity determinations in vitro ( T14.27 ) .
Even extracellular medium composition may have an effect on cancer expression .
Shortened cell interphase , leaving less time for cell repair .
Dividing DNA is less stable , as separated from histones .
Rise in the mutated population of cells .
4. action on cellular receptor or growth factor action on a hormonal receptor action on organ size mitosis for replacement of dead cells at relatively low concentration 5. sustained cytotoxicity-coordinated hyperplasia with subsequent regenerative growth 6. interruption of cell-cell communication 7. inhibition of apoptosis 8. inflammation 9. simple tissue destruction 10. cell proliferation together with oxidative damage T14.27 .
Tests based on Increased Cell Proliferation .
Chemicals that Produce Hyperplasia in Humans .
Proliferation Agents associated with Human Cancers .
modified from Preston-Martin et al Agent of Cell Proliferation Hormones Estrogen Estrogen and progesterone Ovulation Testosterone Drugs Oral contraceptives Anabolic steroids Infectious agents ( through cell destruction ) Hepatitis B virus , genotype C ( hepadnavirus ) Schistosoma hematobium Schistosoma japonicum Clonorchis siniensis Opisthorchis viverrini Tuberculosis Epstein-Barr virus Chemical agents Tobacco Salt Bile and pancreatic juice Betel nut , lime Physical or mechanical trauma Asbestos Chronic impulse noise Other chronic irritations Tropical ulcers Cancer Site Endometrium Breast Ovary Prostate Animal models of carcinogenicity do not always seem to extrapolate to humans , as inspection of T14.29 will show .
It is difficult to know whether an absence of correlation between human cancer incidence and animals models is due to misleading epidemiological data or to inappropriate animal models .
A good case in point is the animal carcinogenicity models for arsenic , which show no effect , while human studies do .
In spite of this , cancer bioassays in animals have long been recognized and accepted since the 1960s and early 1970s as valid predictors of human cancer hazards .
The tests expose animals from several weeks after birth to 2 years .
The sensitivity of carcinogenesis bioassays may be improved by exposing rodents earlier in utero , and continuing for 2.5 years or even until natural death of the animals ( about 3 years ) 11 .
Toxicity of Cancer Treatments Mesothelioma Acoustic neuroma For the top 12 types of cancer , therapy is still today based on radiation , chemotherapy and surgery4 .
Of these , chemotherapy is the least discriminating , killing dividing cells everywhere in the body .
The only logic is that cells dividing frequently should suffer the most , and this works well in leukemias , but poorly in Skin .
14-21 Cell proliferation assessment is important in cancer genesis , but also in the evaluation of the effectiveness of anti-cancer drugs .
Cancer cells ( tumors ) , because of their high proliferation rate , can be preferentially killed by drugs that are cytotoxic , but almost all cancer drugs are carcinogenic .
The hair and lining of the gut are affected , causing hair loss and diarrhea .
Some tumors such as mesothelioma are very difficult to treat .
Many drugs are also given in combination .
In fact , the rate of introduction of truly new drugs has slowed .
There is a line of thinking among oncologists promoting the control of tumors , considered more feasible than their eradication .
And there are many remaining mysteries .
Carcinogenicity of Metals in Humans and Animal Models .
Immune strategies for treating cancer use antibodies binding to antigens expressed specifically by cancer cells .
Vascular strategies attempt to curb the tumor 's blood supply .
Oncological hyperthermia takes advantage of a tumor's increased susceptibility to heat , while radiation therapy further damages cancer cells .
Taxol ( Paclitaxel ) , which kills cancer cells by destabilizing cytoskeletal microtubules and inhibiting cell division should work against many more tumors than it does .
A deep puzzle is drug resistance and tumor adaptation over time .
Relapses occur because drugs have selected resistant variants of tumor cells .
Without drug resistance , most cancers would be curable right now .
These vesicles enlarge and inflate until the drug concentration is a thousand times greater than in the surrounding cell culture .
Chemotherapy can also stimulate cancer cells to grow at certain non-therapeutic concentrations .
The common chemotherapy agent doxorubicin actually encourages the growth of ovarian cancer stem cells12 .
The immature cells make up less than 1 percent of an ovarian cancer , but just a few left behind after surgery can reestablish a tumor .
The physicians felt that her illness might somehow be related to the illness in the animals .
An epidemiologist surveyed the riding arena .
He collected soil samples and examined some of the sick horses .
The epidemiologist was told that after the riding arena had been sprayed for dust control , birds and insects near the arena began to die .
Perhaps something had been volatilized from the soil that was killing these animals ; this might also have affected the little girl .
Because of this possibility , the chemists in the laboratory started looking for volatile substances , but were unable to come up with anything .
Indeed , the search did not produce results until two years later , when one of the chemists , while trying to distill chemicals from the soil , obtained crystals that condensed on a cold finger of his distillation apparatus .
The chemist concluded that the illness of the girl might have been caused by 2,4,5trichlorophenol .
It was therefore decided to 14-25 perform rabbit ear tests in order to establish whether the soil was also contaminated with TCDD ; possibly TCDD might account for the illness .
The rabbit ear tests were done with an extract from the soil .
Some of the rabbits died within a week and all rabbits developed hyperkeratosis on their ears , a typical reaction to TCDD .
It could therefore be established that TCDD was most likely present , and additional chemical analysis confirmed this .
By now , three years had elapsed ; the riding arena had been excavated twice and topsoil had been removed , because the soil caused continual problems .
The removed soil had been used as fill beneath a road , in a back yard , and in various other locations .
Not only one riding arena had been affected , but three .
All horses exposed repeatedly to the contaminated arena surfaces suffered severe weight loss before they died .
Investigation also revealed that not very many people had been consistently exposed to the soil of the riding arenas .
children showed most of the effects probably because they played in the soil and had more opportunities for contact with it .
People exposed to TCDD often complain of joint pains and pleuritic pains .
We assumed that the other children affected-two three-year-old boys-at one point had chloracne , which had subsided by the time the CDC reinvestigated the case .
The next question we attempted to answer in the investigation was where the TCDD came from and how it got onto the riding arena surface .
We learned of an oil dealer who collected used oil and then sold it to refineries to be recycled .
He had been hired to spray the riding arenas with oil for dust control , which is a customary procedure .
The oil dealer had a very poor memory about where he collected the TCDD .
What we then had to do was to find a company that was making either 2,4,5-T or 2,4,5trichiorophenol .
During the Vietnam War a number of factories produced 2,4,5-T as an ingredient for Agent Orange .
Therefore we contacted the Department of Defense and asked them to review their records of all producers of 2,4,5-T .
They identified a company located in the area of interest to us .
This particular company had stopped its production of 2,4,5-T in 1969 , before the contamination at the riding arenas had occurred .
It had , however , subleased part of its facility to another company , which had made 2,4,5-trichlorophenol for the production of hexachlorophene .
It was the second company that had produced the waste material .
When the company 's factory was visited , a tank was found on the premises that was still partially filled with waste material containing TCDD .
The company 's operators explained that at first they had sent the TCDD containing waste material to a chemical disposal company ; this had been expensive , and they later subcontracted disposal to the oil dealer we had interviewed earlier .
The oil dealer had indeed mixed the waste with salvaged oil , and had sprayed the riding arenas with this mixture for dust control .
One of the oil dealer 's drivers admitted , on questioning , that while hauling oil on one occasion , he found his truck was overloaded when he passed through a weighing station .
Before reaching the next weighing station , he unloaded some of the excess material at a farm owned by the oil dealer .
Chickens on that farm subsequently died .
We later took samples on the farm and were able to find TCDD in soil there .
After establishing these facts , CDC personnel visited the other riding arenas and other locations and took samples for TCDD analysis .
It was established that the other arenas were similarly contaminated .
The oil dealer had several times picked up material from the plant where the TCDD-containing chemical tank was found and had also collected polychlorinated biphenyls from other companies ; these were then mixed with the TCDD and the oil .
Recently it has been established that contamination by TCDD is much more extensive than was earlier thought and that the waste-oil dealer sprayed many more 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin sites with TCDD than those identified in 1974 .
The Environmental Protection Agency learned about these sites from former drivers employed by the waste-oil dealer and from the owner of one of the riding arenas who followed the trucks to their source .
Human health and environmental studies are continuing in Missouri .
In animals it causes severe weight loss , affects reproduction , causes liver damage and skin lesions in some species , depresses the cellmediated immunity , and has been shown to be carcinogenic in rodents .
Human illnesses following exposure to TCDD have not been well delineated .
Most chemicals that we are familiar with are toxic in the milligram or gram range .
In addition to being acutely very toxic , TCDD also produces chronic toxic effects at much lower dosage levels .
It accumulates in tissues and is persistent .
Other extremely toxic compounds , such as some of the chemical warfare gases , break down very rapidly and the body is able to excrete them .
TCDD is not easily eliminated from the body .
It was reported in these articles that workers who had worked with this material had developed hematuria .
One of the authors had also studied 2-methyl-4-chloroaniline in cats .
It is known that cats respond more like humans than do other animal species if they are exposed to anilines and chloroanilines .
At the CDC we performed limited animal experiments by exposing cats to chlordimeform and 2-methyl-4-chloroaniline , and found that toxic effects could indeed be caused in the bladder of the cat , though these effects were not as pronounced as those that had been observed in the workers .
Additionally , urine was collected from the workers to determine whether it contained the 2-methyl-4chloroaniline , and whether chlordimeform could be identified .
The pesticide packaging plant was characterized by very poor work practices : workers were essentially `` bathing '' in chlordimeform .
There were no facilities where the workers could change clothes or wash .
The packaging process was a very dusty operation ; we thought at first that the problem was simply very heavy overexposure in the packaging plant .
But when we examined some farmers who used the material , we found that they also had red blood cells in their urine , though they did not have pronounced hematuria , and their symptoms subsided several weeks after they stopped using this particular pesticide .
Chlordimeform was subsequently taken off the market for a while .
At present , the rules and regulations for using and packaging this material are much more stringent than they were , so there is no longer as much exposure to it .
But marketing of the material is once again allowed and the pesticide is presently being used in the United States and other parts of the world .
Apparently a group of people who were packaging a chemical called chlordimeform developed hematuria .
The state health department in Tennessee was contacted first , and somebody from that department contacted the CDC .
Many of them have not been studied very well ; we know very little about their health effects , and little published information exists on animal toxicology data .
The medical problems among the workers were first discovered when they started going to physicians .
Different people went to different physicians and it was not recognized at first that all workers had an occupational disease in common .
It is at times difficult to recognize occupational illnesses , particularly if they resemble diseases common in the general population .
One patient , for instance , was treated for gonorrhea , and another worker was treated for inflammation of the bladder .
When three people from the pesticide packaging plant went to the same physician , however , this physician began to question whether or not the problems his patients were having might be associated with their work environment .
Questioning revealed that a similar outbreak of illness had occurred at the plant a year before when chlordimeform was being packaged .
The affected workers displayed a number of symptoms at that time , including increased urinary frequency .
Primarily , they all noticed that their urine was bloody .
They also had such symptoms as skin rash and dizziness .
Limited animal studies had been conducted with chlordimeform , and CDC personnel reviewed these .
There was no information on human exposures or toxic effects in humans .
Dog , rat , and rabbit studies conducted with chlordimeform did not suggest that this material caused hematuria .
However , the animal studies showed that chlordimeform is metabolized , and one of the compounds it is metabolized to is 2-methyl-4-chloroaniline .
Angiosarcoma of the liver following vinyl chloride exposure .
Oncogenes and oncoproteins in occupational carcinogenesis .
Telomere Length Abnormalities Occur Early in the Initiation of Epithelial Carcinogenesis .
MYC inactivation uncovers pluripotent differentiation and tumour dormancy in hepatocellular cancer .
Genes that mediate breast cancer metastasis to lung .
Identification of genes needed for regeneration , stem cell function , and tissue homeostasis by systemic gene perturbation in planaria .
The Limits of Two-Year Bioassay Exposure Regimens for Identifying Chemical Carcinogens .
Human ovarian cancer stem/progenitor cells are stimulated by doxorubicin but inhibited by Mullerian inhibiting substance .